# 19.84 - Trading stamps and premiums.
* [19.84.010 - Redeemable cash value to be printed on face.](#1984010---redeemable-cash-value-to-be-printed-on-face)
* [19.84.020 - Must redeem at cash value.](#1984020---must-redeem-at-cash-value)
* [19.84.030 - Distributor liable.](#1984030---distributor-liable)
* [19.84.040 - Criminal penalty.](#1984040---criminal-penalty)
## 19.84.010 - Redeemable cash value to be printed on face.
No person shall sell or issue any stamps, trading stamp, cash discount stamp, check, ticket, coupon or other similar device, which will entitle the holder thereof, on presentation thereof, either singly or in definite number, to receive, either directly from the vendor or indirectly through any other person, money or goods, wares or merchandise, unless each of said stamps, trading stamps, cash discount stamps, checks, tickets, coupons or other similar devices shall have legibly printed or written upon the face thereof the redeemable value thereof in cents.

\[ [1907 c 253 § 1](https://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1907c253.pdf?cite=1907%20c%20253%20§%201); RRS § 5837; \]

## 19.84.020 - Must redeem at cash value.
Any person who shall sell or issue to any person engaged in any trade, business or profession, any stamp, trading stamp, cash discount stamp, check, ticket, coupon, or other similar device which will entitle the holder thereof, on presentation thereof either singly or in definite number, to receive either directly from the vendor or indirectly through any other person, money or goods, wares or merchandise, shall, upon presentation, redeem the same either in goods, wares or merchandise, or in cash, good and lawful money of the United States, at the option of the holder thereof, and any number of such stamps, trading stamps, cash discount stamps, checks, tickets, coupons, or other similar devices shall be redeemed as hereinbefore set forth, at the value in cents printed upon the face thereof, and it shall not be necessary for the holder thereof to have any stipulated number of the same before demand for redemption may be made, but they shall be redeemed in any number, when presented, at the value in cents printed upon the face thereof, as hereinbefore provided.

\[ [1907 c 253 § 2](https://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1907c253.pdf?cite=1907%20c%20253%20§%202); RRS § 5838; \]

## 19.84.030 - Distributor liable.
Any person engaged in any trade, business, or profession who shall distribute, deliver, or present to any person dealing with him or her, in consideration of any article or thing purchased, any stamp, trading stamp, cash discount stamp, check, ticket, coupon, or other similar device, which will entitle the holder thereof, on presentation thereof, either singly or in definite number, to receive, either directly from the person issuing or selling the same, as set forth in RCW 19.84.020, or indirectly through any other person, shall, upon the refusal or failure of the said person issuing or selling same to redeem the same, as set forth in RCW 19.84.020, be liable to the holder thereof for the face value thereof, and shall upon presentation redeem the same, either in goods, wares, or merchandise, or in cash, good and lawful money of the United States of America, at the option of the holder thereof, and in such case any number of such stamps, trading stamps, cash discount stamps, checks, tickets, coupons, or other similar devices, shall be redeemed as hereinbefore set forth, at the value in cents printed upon the face thereof, and it shall not be necessary for the holder thereof to have any stipulated number of the same before demand for redemption may be made, but they shall be redeemed in any number, when presented, at the value in cents printed upon the face thereof, as hereinbefore provided.

\[ [2011 c 336 § 555](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/2011-12/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/Senate/5045.SL.pdf?cite=2011%20c%20336%20§%20555); [1907 c 253 § 3](https://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1907c253.pdf?cite=1907%20c%20253%20§%203); RRS § 5839; \]

## 19.84.040 - Criminal penalty.
Any person, firm or corporation who shall violate any of the provisions of this chapter shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor, and shall be fined not less than one hundred dollars nor more than one thousand dollars for each offense.

\[ [1907 c 253 § 4](https://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1907c253.pdf?cite=1907%20c%20253%20§%204); RRS § 5840; \]

