# 19.56 - Unsolicited goods.
* [19.56.010 - Newspaper mailed without authority is gift.](#1956010---newspaper-mailed-without-authority-is-gift)
* [19.56.020 - Unsolicited goods or services as gifts.](#1956020---unsolicited-goods-or-services-as-gifts)
* [19.56.030 - Violation—Application of consumer protection act.](#1956030---violationapplication-of-consumer-protection-act)
## 19.56.010 - Newspaper mailed without authority is gift.
Whenever any person, company or corporation owning or controlling any newspaper or periodical of any kind, or whenever any editor or proprietor of any such newspaper or periodical shall mail or send any such newspaper or periodical to any person or persons in this state without first receiving an order for said newspaper or periodical from such person or persons to whom said newspaper or periodical is mailed or sent, it shall be deemed to be a gift, and no debt or obligation shall accrue against such person or persons, whether said newspaper or periodical is received by the person or persons to whom it is sent or not.

\[ [2000 c 171 § 55](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/1999-00/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/House/2400.SL.pdf?cite=2000%20c%20171%20§%2055); [1890 p 460 § 1](http://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1890c460.pdf?cite=1890%20p%20460%20§%201); RRS § 5842; \]

## 19.56.020 - Unsolicited goods or services as gifts.
If unsolicited goods or services are provided to a person, the person has a right to accept the goods or services as a gift only, and is not bound to return the goods or services. Goods or services are not considered to have been solicited unless the recipient specifically requested, in an affirmative manner, the receipt of the goods or services according to the terms under which they are being offered. Goods or services are not considered to have been requested if a person fails to respond to an invitation to purchase the goods or services and the goods or services are provided notwithstanding. If the unsolicited goods or services are either addressed to or intended for the recipient, the recipient may use them or dispose of them in any manner without any obligation to the provider, and in any action for goods or services sold and delivered, or in any action for the return of the goods, it is a complete defense that the goods or services were provided voluntarily and that the defendant did not affirmatively order or request the goods or services, either orally or in writing.

\[ [1992 c 43 § 1](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/1991-92/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/Senate/6427.SL.pdf?cite=1992%20c%2043%20§%201); [1967 c 57 § 1](http://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1967c57.pdf?cite=1967%20c%2057%20§%201); \]

## 19.56.030 - Violation—Application of consumer protection act.
Violation of RCW 19.56.020 is a matter affecting the public interest for the purpose of applying chapter 19.86 RCW. Failure to comply with this chapter is not reasonable in relation to the development and preservation of business. A violation of RCW 19.56.020 constitutes an unfair or deceptive act or practice in trade or commerce for the purposes of applying chapter 19.86 RCW.

\[ [1992 c 43 § 2](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/1991-92/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/Senate/6427.SL.pdf?cite=1992%20c%2043%20§%202); \]

