# 19.06 - Blind made products—Services.
* [19.06.010 - Labels—Contents—Requirements—Prohibited acts.](#1906010---labelscontentsrequirementsprohibited-acts)
* [19.06.020 - Governmental agencies shall purchase goods and services—Conditions.](#1906020---governmental-agencies-shall-purchase-goods-and-servicesconditions)
* [19.06.030 - Advertising limitations.](#1906030---advertising-limitations)
* [19.06.040 - Penalty.](#1906040---penalty)
## 19.06.010 - Labels—Contents—Requirements—Prohibited acts.
Products made by blind persons and sold or distributed in this state as blind made may bear a label affixed directly to the product reading "MADE BY THE BLIND" and shall show the distributor's or manufacturer's name. Any product bearing such label shall have been made by blind people to the extent of at least seventy-five percent of the labor hours required for its manufacture. No other label, trade name or sales device tending to create the impression that a product is made by blind persons shall be used in connection with the sale or distribution of such product unless the product shall have been made by blind people to the extent of at least seventy-five percent of the labor hours required for its manufacture.

\[ [2009 c 549 § 1009](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/2009-10/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/Senate/5038.SL.pdf?cite=2009%20c%20549%20§%201009); [1961 c 56 § 1](https://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1961c56.pdf?cite=1961%20c%2056%20§%201); [1959 c 100 § 1](https://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1959c100.pdf?cite=1959%20c%20100%20§%201); \]

## 19.06.020 - Governmental agencies shall purchase goods and services—Conditions.
Any board, commission, officer, employee or other person or persons of the state, or any county, city, town, school district or other agency, political subdivision or taxing district of the state, whose duty it is to purchase materials, supplies, goods, wares, merchandise or produce, or to procure services, for the use of any department or institution within the state, shall make such purchases and procure such services whenever available, from any nonprofit agency for the blind located within the state which manufactures or distributes blind made products: PROVIDED, That the goods and services made by or offered by such agencies shall be equal in quality and price to those available from other sources.

\[ [1961 c 56 § 4](https://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1961c56.pdf?cite=1961%20c%2056%20§%204); [1959 c 100 § 2](https://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1959c100.pdf?cite=1959%20c%20100%20§%202); \]

## 19.06.030 - Advertising limitations.
No advertising of blind made products shall refer to any product which is not blind made, nor shall any such advertising contain or refer to names or pictures of any blind persons or otherwise exploit the blind.

\[ [1961 c 56 § 2](https://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1961c56.pdf?cite=1961%20c%2056%20§%202); \]

## 19.06.040 - Penalty.
Any violation of this chapter shall be a misdemeanor.

\[ [1961 c 56 § 3](https://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1961c56.pdf?cite=1961%20c%2056%20§%203); \]

