# 19.76 - Beverage bottles, etc.—Labeling—Refilling.
* [19.76.100 - Labels on bottles, etc.—Filing—Publication.](#1976100---labels-on-bottles-etcfilingpublication)
* [19.76.110 - Refilling bottles, etc.—Forbidden.](#1976110---refilling-bottles-etcforbidden)
* [19.76.120 - Refilling bottles, etc.—Possession as evidence.](#1976120---refilling-bottles-etcpossession-as-evidence)
* [19.76.130 - Refilling bottles, etc.—Penalty.](#1976130---refilling-bottles-etcpenalty)
## 19.76.100 - Labels on bottles, etc.—Filing—Publication.
All persons engaged in the manufacture, bottling or selling of ale, porter, lager beer, soda, mineral water, or other beverages in casks, kegs, bottles or boxes, with their names or other marks of ownership stamped or marked thereon, may file in the office of the secretary of state a description of names or marks so used by them, and publish the same in a newspaper of general circulation in the county, printed in the English language, once a week for six successive weeks, in counties where the articles are manufactured, bottled or sold.

\[ [1985 c 469 § 11](http://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1985c469.pdf?cite=1985%20c%20469%20§%2011); [1981 c 302 § 1](http://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1981c302.pdf?cite=1981%20c%20302%20§%201); [1897 c 38 § 1](http://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1897c38.pdf?cite=1897%20c%2038%20§%201); RRS § 11546; \]

## 19.76.110 - Refilling bottles, etc.—Forbidden.
It is hereby declared to be unlawful for any person or persons hereafter, without the written consent of the owner or owners thereof, to fill with ale, porter, lager beer or soda, mineral water or other beverages, for sale or to be furnished to customers, any such casks, barrels, kegs, bottles or boxes so marked or stamped, or to sell, dispose of, buy or traffic in, or wantonly destroy any such cask, barrel, keg, bottle or box so marked, stamped, by the owner or owners thereof, after such owner or owners shall have complied with the provisions of RCW 19.76.100.

\[ [2003 c 53 § 148](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/2003-04/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/Senate/5758.SL.pdf?cite=2003%20c%2053%20§%20148); [1897 c 38 § 2](http://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1897c38.pdf?cite=1897%20c%2038%20§%202); RRS § 11547; \]

## 19.76.120 - Refilling bottles, etc.—Possession as evidence.
The using by any person other than the rightful owner thereof, without such written permission, of any such cask, barrel, keg, bottle or box, for the sale therein of ale, porter, lager beer, soda, mineral waters or other beverages, or to be furnished to customers, or the buying, selling or trafficking in any such barrel, keg, bottle or box, by any person other than the owner, without such written permission, or the fact that any junk dealer or dealers in casks, barrels, kegs, bottles or boxes, shall have in his or her possession any such cask, barrel, keg, bottle or box so marked or stamped and registered as aforesaid, without such written permission, shall and is hereby declared to be prima facie evidence that such use, buying, selling, trafficking in or possession is unlawful within the meaning of RCW 19.76.100 through 19.76.120.

\[ [1897 c 38 § 3](http://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1897c38.pdf?cite=1897%20c%2038%20§%203); RRS § 11548; \]

## 19.76.130 - Refilling bottles, etc.—Penalty.
Any person who violates RCW 19.76.100 through 19.76.120 is guilty of a misdemeanor, and upon conviction shall be fined five dollars for each and every cask, barrel, keg, or box, and fifty cents for each and every bottle so by him, her, or them filled, bought, sold, used, trafficked in, or wantonly destroyed, together with costs of suit for first offense, and ten dollars for each and every cask, barrel, keg, and box and one dollar for each and every bottle so filled, bought, sold, used, trafficked in, or wantonly destroyed, together with the costs of suit for each subsequent offense.

\[ [2003 c 53 § 149](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/2003-04/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/Senate/5758.SL.pdf?cite=2003%20c%2053%20§%20149); \]

