# 19.166 - International student exchange.
* [19.166.010 - Intent.](#19166010---intent)
* [19.166.020 - Definitions.](#19166020---definitions)
* [19.166.030 - Organization registration.](#19166030---organization-registration)
* [19.166.040 - Organization application for registration—Suspension of license or certificate for noncompliance with support order—Reinstatement.](#19166040---organization-application-for-registrationsuspension-of-license-or-certificate-for-noncompliance-with-support-orderreinstatement)
* [19.166.050 - Standards.](#19166050---standards)
* [19.166.060 - Rules—Fee.](#19166060---rulesfee)
* [19.166.070 - Informational document.](#19166070---informational-document)
* [19.166.080 - Complaints.](#19166080---complaints)
* [19.166.090 - Violations—Misdemeanor.](#19166090---violationsmisdemeanor)
* [19.166.100 - Violations—Consumer protection act.](#19166100---violationsconsumer-protection-act)
* [19.166.901 - Effective date—1991 c 128.](#19166901---effective-date1991-c-128)
## 19.166.010 - Intent.
It is the intent of the legislature to:

1. Promote the health, safety, and welfare of international student exchange visitors in Washington in accordance with uniform national standards;

2. Promote quality education and living experiences for international student exchange visitors living in Washington;

3. Promote international awareness among Washington residents, by encouraging Washington residents to interact with international student exchange visitors;

4. Encourage public confidence in international student exchange visitor placement organizations operating in Washington;

5. Encourage and assist with compliance with United States information agency regulations and nationally established standards; and

6. Promote the existence and quality of international student visitor exchange programs operating in Washington.

\[ [1991 c 128 § 1](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/1991-92/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/House/1051-S.SL.pdf?cite=1991%20c%20128%20§%201); \]

## 19.166.020 - Definitions.
Unless the context clearly requires otherwise, the definitions in this section apply throughout this chapter.

1. "International student exchange visitor placement organization" or "organization" means a person, partnership, corporation, or other entity that regularly arranges the placement of international student exchange visitors for the purpose, in whole or in part, of allowing the student an opportunity to attend school in the United States.

2. "International student exchange visitor" or "student" means any person eighteen years of age or under, or up to age twenty-one if enrolled or to be enrolled in high school in this state, placed by an international student exchange visitor placement organization, who enters the United States with a nonimmigrant visa.

\[ [1991 c 128 § 2](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/1991-92/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/House/1051-S.SL.pdf?cite=1991%20c%20128%20§%202); \]

## 19.166.030 - Organization registration.
1. All international student exchange visitor placement organizations that place students in public schools in the state shall register with the secretary of state.

2. Failure to register is a violation of this chapter.

3. Information provided to the secretary of state under this chapter is a public record.

4. Registration shall not be considered or be represented as an endorsement of the organization by the secretary of state or the state of Washington.

5. On a date established by rule by the secretary of state, the secretary of state shall provide annually to the superintendent of public instruction a list of all currently registered international student placement organizations. The superintendent of public instruction shall distribute annually the list of all currently registered international student placement organizations to all Washington state school districts.

\[ [1995 c 60 § 1](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/1995-96/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/Senate/5699.SL.pdf?cite=1995%20c%2060%20§%201); [1991 c 128 § 3](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/1991-92/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/House/1051-S.SL.pdf?cite=1991%20c%20128%20§%203); \]

## 19.166.040 - Organization application for registration—Suspension of license or certificate for noncompliance with support order—Reinstatement.
1. An application for registration as an international student exchange visitor placement organization shall be submitted in the form prescribed by the secretary of state. The application shall include:

    a. Evidence that the organization meets the standards established by the secretary of state under RCW 19.166.050;

    b. The name, address, and telephone number of the organization, its chief executive officer, and the person within the organization who has primary responsibility for supervising placements within the state;

    c. The organization's unified business identification number, if any;

    d. The organization's United States Information Agency number, if any;

    e. Evidence of council on standards for international educational travel listing, if any;

    f. Whether the organization is exempt from federal income tax; and

    g. A list of the organization's placements in Washington for the previous academic year including the number of students placed, their home countries, the school districts in which they were placed, and the length of their placements.

2. The application shall be signed by the chief executive officer of the organization and the person within the organization who has primary responsibility for supervising placements within Washington. If the secretary of state determines that the application is complete, the secretary of state shall file the application and the applicant is registered.

3. International student exchange visitor placement organizations that have registered shall inform the secretary of state of any changes in the information required under subsection (1) of this section within thirty days of the change.

4. Registration shall be renewed annually as established by rule by the office of the secretary of state.

5. The office of the secretary of state shall immediately suspend the license or certificate of a person who has been certified pursuant to RCW 74.20A.320 by the department of social and health services as a person who is not in compliance with a support order or a *residential or visitation order. If the person has continued to meet all other requirements for reinstatement during the suspension, reissuance of the license or certificate shall be automatic upon the office of the secretary of state's receipt of a release issued by the department of social and health services stating that the licensee is in compliance with the order.

\[ [1997 c 58 § 854](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/1997-98/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/House/3901.SL.pdf?cite=1997%20c%2058%20§%20854); [1995 c 60 § 2](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/1995-96/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/Senate/5699.SL.pdf?cite=1995%20c%2060%20§%202); [1991 c 128 § 5](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/1991-92/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/House/1051-S.SL.pdf?cite=1991%20c%20128%20§%205); \]

## 19.166.050 - Standards.
The secretary of state shall adopt standards for international student exchange visitor placement organizations. In adopting the standards, the secretary of state shall strive to adopt standards established by the United States Information Agency and the council on standards for international educational travel and strive to achieve uniformity with national standards. The secretary of state may incorporate standards established by the United States Information Agency or the council on standards for international educational travel by reference and may accept an organization's designation by the United States Information Agency or acceptance for listing by the council on standards for international educational travel as evidence of compliance with such standards.

\[ [1991 c 128 § 4](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/1991-92/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/House/1051-S.SL.pdf?cite=1991%20c%20128%20§%204); \]

## 19.166.060 - Rules—Fee.
The secretary of state may adopt rules as necessary to carry out its duties under this chapter. The rules may include providing for a reasonable registration fee, not to exceed fifty dollars, to defray the costs of processing registrations.

\[ [1991 c 128 § 6](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/1991-92/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/House/1051-S.SL.pdf?cite=1991%20c%20128%20§%206); \]

## 19.166.070 - Informational document.
International student exchange organizations that have agreed to provide services to place students in the state shall provide an informational document, in English, to each student, host family, and superintendent of the school district in which the student is being placed. The document shall be provided before placement and shall include the following:

1. An explanation of the services to be performed by the organization for the student, host family, and school district;

2. A summary of this chapter prepared by the secretary of state;

3. Telephone numbers that the student, host family, and school district may call for assistance. The telephone numbers shall include, at minimum, an in-state telephone number for the organization, and the telephone numbers of the organization's national headquarters, if any, the United States Information Agency, and the office of the secretary of state.

\[ [1991 c 128 § 7](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/1991-92/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/House/1051-S.SL.pdf?cite=1991%20c%20128%20§%207); \]

## 19.166.080 - Complaints.
The secretary of state may, upon receipt of a complaint regarding an international student exchange organization, report the matter to the organization involved, the United States Information Agency, or the council on standards for international education travel, as he or she deems appropriate.

\[ [1991 c 128 § 8](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/1991-92/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/House/1051-S.SL.pdf?cite=1991%20c%20128%20§%208); \]

## 19.166.090 - Violations—Misdemeanor.
Any person who violates any provision of this chapter or who willfully and knowingly gives false or incorrect information to the secretary of state, attorney general, or county prosecuting attorney in filing statements required by this chapter, whether or not such statement or report is verified, is guilty of a misdemeanor punishable under chapter 9A.20 RCW.

\[ [2000 c 171 § 75](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/1999-00/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/House/2400.SL.pdf?cite=2000%20c%20171%20§%2075); [1991 c 128 § 9](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/1991-92/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/House/1051-S.SL.pdf?cite=1991%20c%20128%20§%209); \]

## 19.166.100 - Violations—Consumer protection act.
The legislature finds that the practices covered by this chapter are matters vitally affecting the public interest for the purpose of applying the consumer protection act, chapter 19.86 RCW. Violations of this chapter are not reasonable in relation to the development and preservation of business. A violation of this chapter is an unfair or deceptive act in trade or commerce and an unfair method of competition for the purpose of applying the consumer protection act, chapter 19.86 RCW.

\[ [1991 c 128 § 10](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/1991-92/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/House/1051-S.SL.pdf?cite=1991%20c%20128%20§%2010); \]

## 19.166.901 - Effective date—1991 c 128.
Sections 1 through 11 and 13 through 16 of this act shall take effect January 1, 1992.

\[ [1991 c 128 § 17](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/1991-92/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/House/1051-S.SL.pdf?cite=1991%20c%20128%20§%2017); \]

