# 19.200 - Automated financial transactions.
* [19.200.010 - Findings—Intent—Restrictions on credit and debit card receipts—Application—Definitions.](#19200010---findingsintentrestrictions-on-credit-and-debit-card-receiptsapplicationdefinitions)
* [19.200.901 - Effective date—2000 c 163.](#19200901---effective-date2000-c-163)
## 19.200.010 - Findings—Intent—Restrictions on credit and debit card receipts—Application—Definitions.
1. The legislature finds that credit and debit cards are important tools for consumers in today's economy. The legislature also finds that unscrupulous persons often fraudulently use the card accounts of others by stealing the card itself or by obtaining the necessary information to fraudulently charge the purchase of goods and services to another person's account. The legislature intends to provide some protection for consumers from the latter by limiting the information that can appear on a card receipt.

2. No person that accepts credit or debit cards for the transaction of business shall print more than the last five digits of the card account number or print the card expiration date on a credit or debit card receipt. This includes all receipts kept by the person or provided to the cardholder.

3. This section shall apply only to receipts that are electronically printed and shall not apply to transactions in which the sole means of recording the card number is by handwriting or by an imprint or copy of the credit or debit card.

4. The definitions in this section apply throughout this chapter unless the context clearly requires otherwise.

    a.  "Credit card" means a card or device existing for the purpose of obtaining money, property, labor, or services on credit.

    b.  "Debit card" means a card or device used to obtain money, property, labor, or services by a transaction that debits a cardholder's account, rather than extending credit.

\[ [2009 c 382 § 1](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/2009-10/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/House/1127.SL.pdf?cite=2009%20c%20382%20§%201); [2000 c 163 § 1](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/1999-00/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/House/2410-S.SL.pdf?cite=2000%20c%20163%20§%201); \]

## 19.200.901 - Effective date—2000 c 163.
This act takes effect July 1, 2001.

\[ [2000 c 163 § 4](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/1999-00/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/House/2410-S.SL.pdf?cite=2000%20c%20163%20§%204); \]

