# 70.92 - Provisions in buildings for aged and handicapped persons.
* [70.92.100 - Legislative intent.](#7092100---legislative-intent)
* [70.92.110 - Buildings and structures to which standards and specifications apply—Exemptions.](#7092110---buildings-and-structures-to-which-standards-and-specifications-applyexemptions)
* [70.92.120 - Handicap symbol—Display—Signs showing location of entrance for handicapped.](#7092120---handicap-symboldisplaysigns-showing-location-of-entrance-for-handicapped)
* [70.92.130 - Definitions.](#7092130---definitions)
* [70.92.140 - Minimum standards for facilities—Adoption—Facilities to be included.](#7092140---minimum-standards-for-facilitiesadoptionfacilities-to-be-included)
* [70.92.150 - Standards adopted by other states to be considered—Majority vote.](#7092150---standards-adopted-by-other-states-to-be-consideredmajority-vote)
* [70.92.160 - Waiver from compliance with standards.](#7092160---waiver-from-compliance-with-standards)
* [70.92.170 - Personal wireless service facilities—Rules.](#7092170---personal-wireless-service-facilitiesrules)
## 70.92.100 - Legislative intent.
It is the intent of the legislature that, notwithstanding any law to the contrary, plans and specifications for the erection of buildings through the use of public or private funds shall make special provisions for elderly or physically disabled persons.

\[ [1975 1st ex.s. c 110 § 1](https://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1975ex1c110.pdf?cite=1975%201st%20ex.s.%20c%20110%20§%201); \]

## 70.92.110 - Buildings and structures to which standards and specifications apply—Exemptions.
The standards and specifications adopted under this chapter shall, as provided in this section, apply to buildings, structures, or portions thereof used primarily for group A-1 through group U-1 occupancies, except for group R-3 occupancies, as defined in the Uniform Building Code, 1994 edition, published by the International Conference of Building Officials. All such buildings, structures, or portions thereof, which are constructed, substantially remodeled, or substantially rehabilitated after July 1, 1976, shall conform to the standards and specifications adopted under this chapter: PROVIDED, That the following buildings, structures, or portions thereof shall be exempt from this chapter:

1. Buildings, structures, or portions thereof for which construction contracts have been awarded prior to July 1, 1976;

2. Any building, structure, or portion thereof in respect to which the administrative authority deems, after considering all circumstances applying thereto, that full compliance is impracticable: PROVIDED, That, such a determination shall be made no later than at the time of issuance of the building permit for the construction, remodeling, or rehabilitation: PROVIDED FURTHER, That the board of appeals provided for in chapter 1 of the Uniform Building Code shall have jurisdiction to hear and decide appeals from any decision by the administrative authority regarding a waiver or failure to grant a waiver from compliance with the standards adopted pursuant to RCW 70.92.100 through 70.92.160. The provisions of the Uniform Building Code regarding the appeals process shall govern the appeals herein;

3. Any building or structure used solely for dwelling purposes and which contains not more than two dwelling units;

4. Any building or structure not used primarily for group A-1 through group U-1 occupancies, except for group R-3 occupancies, as set forth in the Uniform Building Code, 1994 edition, published by the International Conference of Building Officials; or

5. Apartment houses with ten or fewer units.

\[ [1995 c 343 § 3](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/1995-96/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/Senate/5677.SL.pdf?cite=1995%20c%20343%20§%203); [1989 c 14 § 9](https://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1989c14.pdf?cite=1989%20c%2014%20§%209); [1975 1st ex.s. c 110 § 2](https://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1975ex1c110.pdf?cite=1975%201st%20ex.s.%20c%20110%20§%202); \]

## 70.92.120 - Handicap symbol—Display—Signs showing location of entrance for handicapped.
All buildings built in accordance with the standards and specifications provided for in this chapter, and containing facilities that are in compliance therewith, shall display the following symbol which is known as the International Symbol of Access.





Such symbol shall be white on a blue background and shall indicate the location of facilities designed for the physically disabled or elderly. When a building contains an entrance other than the main entrance which is ramped or level for use by physically disabled or elderly persons, a sign with the symbol showing its location shall be posted at or near the main entrance which shall be visible from the adjacent public sidewalk or way.

\[ [1995 c 343 § 4](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/1995-96/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/Senate/5677.SL.pdf?cite=1995%20c%20343%20§%204); [1975 1st ex.s. c 110 § 3](https://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1975ex1c110.pdf?cite=1975%201st%20ex.s.%20c%20110%20§%203); \]

## 70.92.130 - Definitions.
As used in this chapter the following words and phrases shall have the following meanings unless the context clearly requires otherwise:

1. "Administrative authority" means the building department of each county, city, or town of this state;

2. "Substantially remodeled or substantially rehabilitated" means any alteration or restoration of a building or structure within any twelve-month period, the cost of which exceeds sixty percent of the value of the particular building or structure;

3. "Council" means the state building code council.

\[ [1995 c 343 § 5](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/1995-96/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/Senate/5677.SL.pdf?cite=1995%20c%20343%20§%205); [1975 1st ex.s. c 110 § 4](https://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1975ex1c110.pdf?cite=1975%201st%20ex.s.%20c%20110%20§%204); \]

## 70.92.140 - Minimum standards for facilities—Adoption—Facilities to be included.
The *state building code advisory council shall adopt minimum standards by rule and regulation for the provision of facilities in buildings and structures to accommodate the elderly, as well as physically disabled persons, which shall include but not be limited to standards for:

1. Ramps;

2. Doors and doorways;

3. Stairs;

4. Floors;

5. Entrances;

6. Toilet rooms and paraphernalia therein;

7. Water fountains;

8. Public telephones;

9. Elevators;

10. Switches and levers for the control of light, ventilation, windows, mirrors, etc.;

11. Plaques identifying such facilities;

12. Turnstiles and revolving doors;

13. Kitchen facilities, where appropriate;

14. Grading of approaches to entrances;

15. Parking facilities;

16. Seating facilities, where appropriate, in buildings where people normally assemble.

\[ [1975 1st ex.s. c 110 § 5](https://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1975ex1c110.pdf?cite=1975%201st%20ex.s.%20c%20110%20§%205); \]

## 70.92.150 - Standards adopted by other states to be considered—Majority vote.
The council in adopting these minimum standards shall consider minimum standards adopted by both law and rule and regulation in other states and the government of the United States: PROVIDED, That no standards adopted by the council pursuant to RCW 70.92.100 through 70.92.160 shall take effect until July 1, 1976. The council shall adopt such standards by majority vote pursuant to the provisions of chapter 34.05 RCW.

\[ [1995 c 343 § 6](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/1995-96/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/Senate/5677.SL.pdf?cite=1995%20c%20343%20§%206); [1975 1st ex.s. c 110 § 6](https://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1975ex1c110.pdf?cite=1975%201st%20ex.s.%20c%20110%20§%206); \]

## 70.92.160 - Waiver from compliance with standards.
The administrative authority of any jurisdiction may grant a waiver from compliance with any standard adopted hereunder for a particular building or structure if it determines that compliance with the particular standard is impractical: PROVIDED, That such a determination shall be made no later than at the time of issuance of the building permit for the construction, remodeling, or rehabilitation: PROVIDED FURTHER, That the board of appeals provided for in chapter 1 of the Uniform Building Code shall have jurisdiction to hear and decide appeals from any decision by the administrative authority regarding a waiver or failure to grant a waiver from compliance with the standards adopted pursuant to RCW 70.92.100 through 70.92.160. The provisions of the Uniform Building Code regarding the appeals process shall govern the appeals herein.

\[ [1995 c 343 § 7](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/1995-96/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/Senate/5677.SL.pdf?cite=1995%20c%20343%20§%207); [1975 1st ex.s. c 110 § 7](https://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1975ex1c110.pdf?cite=1975%201st%20ex.s.%20c%20110%20§%207); \]

## 70.92.170 - Personal wireless service facilities—Rules.
1. The state building code council shall amend its rules under chapter 70.92 RCW, to the extent practicable while still maintaining the certification of those regulations under the federal Americans with disabilities act, to exempt personal wireless services equipment shelters, or the room or enclosure housing equipment for personal wireless service facilities, that meet the following conditions: (a) The shelter is not staffed; and (b) to conduct maintenance activities, employees who visit the shelter must be able to climb.

2. For the purposes of this section, "personal wireless service facilities" means facilities for the provision of personal wireless services.

\[ [1996 c 323 § 5](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/1995-96/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/House/2828-S.SL.pdf?cite=1996%20c%20323%20§%205); \]

