# 70.75 - Firefighting equipment—Standardization.
* [70.75.010 - Standard thread specified—Exceptions.](#7075010---standard-thread-specifiedexceptions)
* [70.75.020 - Duties of chief of the Washington state patrol.](#7075020---duties-of-chief-of-the-washington-state-patrol)
* [70.75.030 - Duties of chief of the Washington state patrol—Notification of industrial establishments and property owners having equipment.](#7075030---duties-of-chief-of-the-washington-state-patrolnotification-of-industrial-establishments-and-property-owners-having-equipment)
* [70.75.040 - Sale of nonstandard equipment as misdemeanor—Exceptions.](#7075040---sale-of-nonstandard-equipment-as-misdemeanorexceptions)
## 70.75.010 - Standard thread specified—Exceptions.
All equipment for fire protection purposes, other than for forest firefighting, purchased by state and municipal authorities, or any other authorities having charge of public property, shall be equipped with the standard threads designated as the national standard thread as adopted by the American Insurance Association and defined in its pamphlet No. 194, dated 1963: PROVIDED, That this section shall not apply to steamer connections on fire hydrants.

\[ [1967 c 152 § 1](https://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1967c152.pdf?cite=1967%20c%20152%20§%201); \]

## 70.75.020 - Duties of chief of the Washington state patrol.
The standardization of existing fire protection equipment in this state shall be arranged for and carried out by or under the direction of the chief of the Washington state patrol, through the director of fire protection. He or she shall provide the appliances necessary for carrying on this work, shall proceed with such standardization as rapidly as possible, and shall require the completion of such work within a period of five years from June 8, 1967: PROVIDED, That the chief of the Washington state patrol, through the director of fire protection, may exempt special purpose fire equipment and existing fire protection equipment from standardization when it is established that such equipment is not essential to the coordination of public fire protection operations.

\[ [1995 c 369 § 41](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/1995-96/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/Senate/5093-S.SL.pdf?cite=1995%20c%20369%20§%2041); [1986 c 266 § 96](https://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1986c266.pdf?cite=1986%20c%20266%20§%2096); [1967 c 152 § 2](https://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1967c152.pdf?cite=1967%20c%20152%20§%202); \]

## 70.75.030 - Duties of chief of the Washington state patrol—Notification of industrial establishments and property owners having equipment.
The chief of the Washington state patrol, through the director of fire protection, shall notify industrial establishments and property owners having equipment, which may be necessary for fire department use in protecting the property or putting out fire, of any changes necessary to bring their equipment up to the requirements of the standard established by RCW 70.75.020, and shall render such assistance as may be available for converting substandard equipment to meet standard specifications and requirements.

\[ [1995 c 369 § 42](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/1995-96/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/Senate/5093-S.SL.pdf?cite=1995%20c%20369%20§%2042); [1986 c 266 § 97](https://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1986c266.pdf?cite=1986%20c%20266%20§%2097); [1967 c 152 § 3](https://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1967c152.pdf?cite=1967%20c%20152%20§%203); \]

## 70.75.040 - Sale of nonstandard equipment as misdemeanor—Exceptions.
Any person who, without approval of the chief of the Washington state patrol, through the director of fire protection, sells or offers for sale in Washington any fire hose, fire engine or other equipment for fire protection purposes which is fitted or equipped with other than the standard thread is guilty of a misdemeanor: PROVIDED, That fire equipment for special purposes, research, programs, forest firefighting, or special features of fire protection equipment found appropriate for uniformity within a particular protection area may be specifically exempted from this requirement by order of the chief of the Washington state patrol, through the director of fire protection.

\[ [1995 c 369 § 43](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/1995-96/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/Senate/5093-S.SL.pdf?cite=1995%20c%20369%20§%2043); [1986 c 266 § 98](https://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1986c266.pdf?cite=1986%20c%20266%20§%2098); [1967 c 152 § 4](https://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1967c152.pdf?cite=1967%20c%20152%20§%204); \]

