# 70.10 - Comprehensive community health centers.
* [70.10.010 - Declaration of policy—Combining health services—State authorized to cooperate with other entities in constructing.](#7010010---declaration-of-policycombining-health-servicesstate-authorized-to-cooperate-with-other-entities-in-constructing)
* [70.10.020 - "Comprehensive community health center" defined.](#7010020---comprehensive-community-health-center-defined)
* [70.10.030 - Authorization to apply for and administer federal or state funds.](#7010030---authorization-to-apply-for-and-administer-federal-or-state-funds)
* [70.10.040 - Application for federal or state funds for construction of facility as part of or separate from health center—Processing and approval by administering agencies—Decision on use as part of comprehensive health center.](#7010040---application-for-federal-or-state-funds-for-construction-of-facility-as-part-of-or-separate-from-health-centerprocessing-and-approval-by-administering-agenciesdecision-on-use-as-part-of-comprehensive-health-center)
* [70.10.050 - Application for federal or state funds for construction of facility as part of or separate from health center—Cooperation between agencies in standardizing application procedures and forms.](#7010050---application-for-federal-or-state-funds-for-construction-of-facility-as-part-of-or-separate-from-health-centercooperation-between-agencies-in-standardizing-application-procedures-and-forms)
* [70.10.060 - Adoption of rules and regulations—Liberal construction of chapter.](#7010060---adoption-of-rules-and-regulationsliberal-construction-of-chapter)
## 70.10.010 - Declaration of policy—Combining health services—State authorized to cooperate with other entities in constructing.
It is declared to be the policy of the legislature of the state of Washington that, wherever feasible, community health services and services for persons with mental illness or intellectual disabilities shall be combined within single facilities in order to provide maximum utilization of available funds and personnel, and to assure the greatest possible coordination of such services for the benefit of those requiring them. It is further declared to be the policy of the legislature to authorize the state to cooperate with counties, cities, and other municipal corporations in order to encourage them to take such steps as may be necessary to construct comprehensive community health centers in communities throughout the state.

\[ [2010 c 94 § 15](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/2009-10/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/House/2490.SL.pdf?cite=2010%20c%2094%20§%2015); [1967 ex.s. c 4 § 1](http://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1967ex1c4.pdf?cite=1967%20ex.s.%20c%204%20§%201); \]

## 70.10.020 - "Comprehensive community health center" defined.
The term "comprehensive community health center" as used in this chapter shall mean a health facility housing community health, mental health, and developmental disabilities services.

\[ [1977 ex.s. c 80 § 37](http://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1977ex1c80.pdf?cite=1977%20ex.s.%20c%2080%20§%2037); [1967 ex.s. c 4 § 2](http://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1967ex1c4.pdf?cite=1967%20ex.s.%20c%204%20§%202); \]

## 70.10.030 - Authorization to apply for and administer federal or state funds.
The several agencies of the state authorized to administer within the state the various federal acts providing federal moneys to assist in the cost of establishing facilities for community health and mental health and facilities for persons with intellectual disabilities, are authorized to apply for and disburse federal grants, matching funds, or other funds, including gifts or donations from any source, available for use by counties, cities, other municipal corporations or nonprofit corporations. Upon application, these agencies shall also be authorized to distribute such state funds as may be appropriated by the legislature for such local construction projects: PROVIDED, That where state funds have been appropriated to assist in covering the cost of constructing a comprehensive community health center, or a facility for community health and mental health or a facility for persons with intellectual disabilities, and where any county, city, other municipal corporation or nonprofit corporation has submitted an approved application for such state funds, then, after any applicable federal grant has been deducted from the total cost of construction, the state agency or agencies in charge of each program may allocate to such applicant an amount not to exceed fifty percent of that particular program's contribution toward the balance of remaining construction costs.

\[ [2010 c 94 § 16](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/2009-10/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/House/2490.SL.pdf?cite=2010%20c%2094%20§%2016); [1967 ex.s. c 4 § 3](http://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1967ex1c4.pdf?cite=1967%20ex.s.%20c%204%20§%203); \]

## 70.10.040 - Application for federal or state funds for construction of facility as part of or separate from health center—Processing and approval by administering agencies—Decision on use as part of comprehensive health center.
Any application for federal or state funds to be used for construction of the community health, mental health, or developmental disabilities facility, which will be part of the comprehensive community health center as defined in RCW 70.10.020, shall be separately processed and approved by the state agency which has been designated to administer the particular federal or state program involved. Any application for federal or state funds for a construction project to establish a community health, mental health, or developmental disabilities facility not part of a comprehensive health center shall be processed by the state agency which is designated to administer the particular federal or state program involved. This agency shall also forward a copy of the application to the other agency or agencies designated to administer the program or programs providing funds for construction of the facilities which make up a comprehensive health center. The agency or agencies receiving this copy of the application shall have a period of time not to exceed sixty days in which to file a statement with the agency to which the application has been submitted and to any statutory advisory council or committee which has been designated to advise the administering agency with regard to the program, stating that the proposed facility should or should not be part of a comprehensive health center.

\[ [1977 ex.s. c 80 § 38](http://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1977ex1c80.pdf?cite=1977%20ex.s.%20c%2080%20§%2038); [1967 ex.s. c 4 § 4](http://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1967ex1c4.pdf?cite=1967%20ex.s.%20c%204%20§%204); \]

## 70.10.050 - Application for federal or state funds for construction of facility as part of or separate from health center—Cooperation between agencies in standardizing application procedures and forms.
The several state agencies processing applications for the construction of comprehensive health centers for community health, mental health, or developmental disability facilities shall cooperate to develop general procedures to be used in implementing the statute and to attempt to develop application forms and procedures which are as nearly standard as possible, after taking cognizance of the different information required in the various programs, to assist applicants in applying to various state agencies.

\[ [1977 ex.s. c 80 § 39](http://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1977ex1c80.pdf?cite=1977%20ex.s.%20c%2080%20§%2039); [1967 ex.s. c 4 § 5](http://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1967ex1c4.pdf?cite=1967%20ex.s.%20c%204%20§%205); \]

## 70.10.060 - Adoption of rules and regulations—Liberal construction of chapter.
In furtherance of the legislative policy to authorize the state to cooperate with the federal government in facilitating the construction of comprehensive community health centers, the state agencies involved shall adopt such rules and regulations as may become necessary to entitle the state and local units of government to share in federal grants, matching funds, or other funds, unless the same be expressly prohibited by this chapter. Any section or provision of this chapter susceptible to more than one construction shall be interpreted in favor of the construction most likely to satisfy federal laws entitling the state and local units of government to receive federal grants, matching funds or other funds for the construction of comprehensive community health centers.

\[ [1967 ex.s. c 4 § 6](http://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1967ex1c4.pdf?cite=1967%20ex.s.%20c%204%20§%206); \]

