# 70.82 - Cerebral palsy program.
* [70.82.010 - Purpose and aim of program.](#7082010---purpose-and-aim-of-program)
* [70.82.021 - Cerebral palsy fund—Moneys transferred to general fund.](#7082021---cerebral-palsy-fundmoneys-transferred-to-general-fund)
* [70.82.022 - Cerebral palsy fund—Appropriations to be paid from general fund.](#7082022---cerebral-palsy-fundappropriations-to-be-paid-from-general-fund)
* [70.82.023 - Cerebral palsy fund—Abolished.](#7082023---cerebral-palsy-fundabolished)
* [70.82.024 - Cerebral palsy fund—Warrants to be paid from general fund.](#7082024---cerebral-palsy-fundwarrants-to-be-paid-from-general-fund)
* [70.82.030 - Eligibility.](#7082030---eligibility)
* [70.82.040 - Diagnosis.](#7082040---diagnosis)
* [70.82.050 - Powers, duties, functions, unallocated funds, transferred.](#7082050---powers-duties-functions-unallocated-funds-transferred)
## 70.82.010 - Purpose and aim of program.
It is hereby declared to be of vital concern to the state of Washington that all persons who are bona fide residents of the state of Washington and who are afflicted with cerebral palsy in any degree be provided with facilities and a program of service for medical care, education, treatment and training to enable them to become normal individuals. In order to effectively accomplish such purpose the department of social and health services, hereinafter called the department, is authorized and instructed and it shall be its duty to establish and administer facilities and a program of service for the discovery, care, education, hospitalization, treatment and training of educable persons afflicted with cerebral palsy, and to provide in connection therewith nursing, medical, surgical and corrective care, together with academic, occupational and related training. Such program shall extend to developing, extending and improving service for the discovery of such persons and for diagnostication and hospitalization and shall include cooperation with other agencies of the state charged with the administration of laws providing for any type of service or aid to persons with disabilities, and with the United States government through any appropriate agency or instrumentality in developing, extending and improving such service, program and facilities. Such facilities shall include field clinics, diagnosis and observation centers, boarding schools, special classes in day schools, research facilities and such other facilities as shall be required to render appropriate aid to such persons. Existing facilities, buildings, hospitals and equipment belonging to or operated by the state of Washington shall be made available for these purposes when use therefor does not conflict with the primary use of such existing facilities. Existing buildings, facilities and equipment belonging to private persons, firms or corporations or to the United States government may be acquired or leased.

\[ [2020 c 274 § 46](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/2019-20/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/House/2390.SL.pdf?cite=2020%20c%20274%20§%2046); [1974 ex.s. c 91 § 2](https://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1974ex1c91.pdf?cite=1974%20ex.s.%20c%2091%20§%202); [1947 c 240 § 1](https://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1947c240.pdf?cite=1947%20c%20240%20§%201); Rem. Supp. 1947 § 5547-1; \]

## 70.82.021 - Cerebral palsy fund—Moneys transferred to general fund.
All moneys in the state treasury to the credit of the state cerebral palsy fund on the first day of May, 1955, and all moneys thereafter paid into the state treasury for or to the credit of the state cerebral palsy fund, shall be and are hereby transferred to and placed in the general fund.

\[ [1955 c 326 § 1](https://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1955c326.pdf?cite=1955%20c%20326%20§%201); \]

## 70.82.022 - Cerebral palsy fund—Appropriations to be paid from general fund.
From and after the first day of April, 1955, all appropriations made by the thirty-fourth legislature from the state cerebral palsy fund shall be paid out of moneys in the general fund.

\[ [1955 c 326 § 2](https://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1955c326.pdf?cite=1955%20c%20326%20§%202); \]

## 70.82.023 - Cerebral palsy fund—Abolished.
From and after the first day of May, 1955, the state cerebral palsy fund is abolished.

\[ [1955 c 326 § 3](https://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1955c326.pdf?cite=1955%20c%20326%20§%203); \]

## 70.82.024 - Cerebral palsy fund—Warrants to be paid from general fund.
From and after the first day of May, 1955, all warrants drawn on the state cerebral palsy fund and not presented for payment shall be paid from the general fund, and it shall be the duty of the state treasurer and he or she is hereby directed to pay such warrants when presented from the general fund.

\[ [2012 c 117 § 402](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/2011-12/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/Senate/6095.SL.pdf?cite=2012%20c%20117%20§%20402); [1955 c 326 § 4](https://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1955c326.pdf?cite=1955%20c%20326%20§%204); \]

## 70.82.030 - Eligibility.
Any resident of this state who is educable but, as the result of cerebral palsy, is unable to take advantage of the regular system of free education of this state may be admitted to or be eligible for any service and facilities provided hereunder, provided such resident has lived in this state continuously for more than one year before his or her application for such admission or eligibility.

\[ [2020 c 274 § 47](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/2019-20/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/House/2390.SL.pdf?cite=2020%20c%20274%20§%2047); [2012 c 117 § 403](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/2011-12/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/Senate/6095.SL.pdf?cite=2012%20c%20117%20§%20403); [1947 c 240 § 3](https://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1947c240.pdf?cite=1947%20c%20240%20§%203); Rem. Supp. 1947 § 5547-2; \]

## 70.82.040 - Diagnosis.
Persons shall be admitted to or be eligible for the services and facilities provided herein only after diagnosis according to procedures and regulations established and approved for this purpose by the department of social and health services.

\[ [1974 ex.s. c 91 § 3](https://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1974ex1c91.pdf?cite=1974%20ex.s.%20c%2091%20§%203); [1947 c 240 § 4](https://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1947c240.pdf?cite=1947%20c%20240%20§%204); Rem. Supp. 1947 § 5547-3; \]

## 70.82.050 - Powers, duties, functions, unallocated funds, transferred.
All powers, duties and functions of the superintendent of public instruction or the state board of education relating to the Cerebral Palsy Center as referred to in chapter 39, Laws of 1973 2nd ex. sess. shall be transferred to the department of social and health services as created in chapter 43.20A RCW, and all unallocated funds within any account to the credit of the superintendent of public instruction or the state board of education for purposes of such Cerebral Palsy Center shall be transferred effective July 1, 1974 to the credit of the department of social and health services, which department shall hereafter expend such funds for such Cerebral Palsy Center purposes as contemplated in the appropriations therefor. All employees of the Cerebral Palsy Center on July 1, 1974 who are classified employees under chapter 41.06 RCW, the state civil service law, shall be assigned and transferred to the department of social and health services to perform their usual duties upon the same terms as formerly, without any loss of rights, subject to any action that may be appropriate thereafter in accordance with the laws and rules governing the state civil service law.

\[ [1974 ex.s. c 91 § 4](https://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1974ex1c91.pdf?cite=1974%20ex.s.%20c%2091%20§%204); \]

