# 70.162 - Indoor air quality in public buildings.
* [70.162.005 - Finding—Intent.](#70162005---findingintent)
* [70.162.010 - Definitions.](#70162010---definitions)
* [70.162.020 - Department duties.](#70162020---department-duties)
* [70.162.030 - State building code council duties.](#70162030---state-building-code-council-duties)
* [70.162.040 - Public agencies—Directive.](#70162040---public-agenciesdirective)
* [70.162.050 - Superintendent of public instruction—Model program.](#70162050---superintendent-of-public-instructionmodel-program)
## 70.162.005 - Finding—Intent.
The legislature finds that many Washington residents spend a significant amount of their time working indoors and that exposure to indoor air pollutants may occur in public buildings, schools, workplaces, and other indoor environments. Scientific studies indicate that pollutants common in the indoor air may include radon, asbestos, volatile organic chemicals including formaldehyde and benzene, combustion by-products including carbon monoxide, nitrogen oxides, and carbon dioxide, metals and gases including lead, chlorine, and ozone, respirable particles, tobacco smoke, biological contaminants, microorganisms, and other contaminants. In some circumstances, exposure to these substances may cause adverse health effects, including respiratory illnesses, multiple chemical sensitivities, skin and eye irritations, headaches, and other related symptoms. There is inadequate information about indoor air quality within the state of Washington, including the sources and nature of indoor air pollution.

The intent of the legislature is to develop a control strategy that will improve indoor air quality, provide for the evaluation of indoor air quality in public buildings, and encourage voluntary measures to improve indoor air quality.

\[ [1989 c 315 § 1](https://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1989c315.pdf?cite=1989%20c%20315%20§%201); \]

## 70.162.010 - Definitions.
Unless the context clearly requires otherwise, the definitions in this section apply throughout this chapter.

1. "Department" means the department of labor and industries.

2. "Public agency" means a state office, commission, committee, bureau, or department.

3. "Industry standard" means the 62-1981R standard established by the American society of heating, refrigerating, and air-conditioning engineers as codified in M-1602 of the building officials and code administrators international manual as of January 1, 1990.

\[ [1989 c 315 § 2](https://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1989c315.pdf?cite=1989%20c%20315%20§%202); \]

## 70.162.020 - Department duties.
The department shall, in coordination with other appropriate state agencies:

1. Recommend a policy for evaluation and prioritization of state-owned or leased buildings with respect to indoor air quality;

2. Recommend stronger workplace regulation of indoor air quality under the Washington industrial safety and health act;

3. Review indoor air quality programs in public schools administered by the superintendent of public instruction and the department of social and health services;

4. Provide educational and informational pamphlets or brochures to state agencies on indoor air quality standards; and

5. Recommend to the legislature measures to implement the recommendations, if any, for the improvement of indoor air quality in public buildings within a reasonable period of time.

\[ [1989 c 315 § 3](https://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1989c315.pdf?cite=1989%20c%20315%20§%203); \]

## 70.162.030 - State building code council duties.
The state building code council is directed to:

1. Review the state building code to determine the adequacy of current mechanical ventilation and filtration standards prescribed by the state compared to the industry standard; and

2. Make appropriate changes in the building code to bring the state prescribed standards into conformity with the industry standard.

\[ [1989 c 315 § 4](https://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1989c315.pdf?cite=1989%20c%20315%20§%204); \]

## 70.162.040 - Public agencies—Directive.
Public agencies are encouraged to:

1. Evaluate the adequacy of mechanical ventilation and filtration systems in light of the recommendations of the American society of heating, refrigerating, and air-conditioning engineers and the building officials and code administrators international; and

2. Maintain and operate any mechanical ventilation and filtration systems in a manner that allows for maximum operating efficiency consistent with the recommendations of the American society of heating, refrigerating, and air-conditioning engineers and the building officials and code administrators international.

\[ [1989 c 315 § 5](https://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1989c315.pdf?cite=1989%20c%20315%20§%205); \]

## 70.162.050 - Superintendent of public instruction—Model program.
1. The superintendent of public instruction may implement a model indoor air quality program in a school district selected by the superintendent.

2. The superintendent shall ensure that the model program includes:

   a. An initial evaluation by an indoor air quality expert of the current indoor air quality in the school district. The evaluation shall be completed within ninety days after the beginning of the school year;

   b. Establishment of procedures to ensure the maintenance and operation of any ventilation and filtration system used. These procedures shall be implemented within thirty days of the initial evaluation;

   c. A reevaluation by an indoor air quality expert, to be conducted approximately two hundred seventy days after the initial evaluation; and

   d. The implementation of other procedures or plans that the superintendent deems necessary to implement the model program.

\[ [1998 c 245 § 116](https://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/1997-98/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/Senate/6219.SL.pdf?cite=1998%20c%20245%20§%20116); [1989 c 315 § 6](https://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1989c315.pdf?cite=1989%20c%20315%20§%206); \]

