# 70.108 - Outdoor music festivals.
* [70.108.010 - Legislative declaration.](#70108010---legislative-declaration)
* [70.108.020 - Definitions.](#70108020---definitions)
* [70.108.030 - Permits—Required—Compliance with rules and regulations.](#70108030---permitsrequiredcompliance-with-rules-and-regulations)
* [70.108.040 - Application for permit—Contents—Filing.](#70108040---application-for-permitcontentsfiling)
* [70.108.050 - Approval or denial of permit—Corrections—Procedure—Judicial review.](#70108050---approval-or-denial-of-permitcorrectionsprocedurejudicial-review)
* [70.108.060 - Reimbursement of expenses incurred in reviewing request.](#70108060---reimbursement-of-expenses-incurred-in-reviewing-request)
* [70.108.070 - Cash deposit—Surety bond—Insurance.](#70108070---cash-depositsurety-bondinsurance)
* [70.108.080 - Revocation of permits.](#70108080---revocation-of-permits)
* [70.108.090 - Drugs prohibited.](#70108090---drugs-prohibited)
* [70.108.100 - Proximity to schools, churches, homes.](#70108100---proximity-to-schools-churches-homes)
* [70.108.110 - Age of patrons.](#70108110---age-of-patrons)
* [70.108.120 - Permits—Posting—Transferability.](#70108120---permitspostingtransferability)
* [70.108.130 - Penalty.](#70108130---penalty)
* [70.108.140 - Inspection of books and records.](#70108140---inspection-of-books-and-records)
* [70.108.150 - Firearms—Penalty.](#70108150---firearmspenalty)
* [70.108.160 - Preparations—Completion requirements.](#70108160---preparationscompletion-requirements)
* [70.108.170 - Local regulations and ordinances not precluded.](#70108170---local-regulations-and-ordinances-not-precluded)
## 70.108.010 - Legislative declaration.
The legislature hereby declares it to be the public interest, and for the protection of the health, welfare and property of the residents of the state of Washington to provide for the orderly and lawful conduct of outdoor music festivals by assuring that proper sanitary, health, fire, safety, and police measures are provided and maintained. This invocation of the police power is prompted by and based upon prior experience with outdoor music festivals where the enforcement of the existing laws and regulations on dangerous and narcotic drugs, indecent exposure, intoxicating liquor, and sanitation has been rendered most difficult by the flagrant violations thereof by a large number of festival patrons.

\[ [1971 ex.s. c 302 § 19](http://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1971ex1c302.pdf?cite=1971%20ex.s.%20c%20302%20§%2019); \]

## 70.108.020 - Definitions.
For the purposes of this chapter the following words and phrases shall have the indicated meanings:

1. "Applicant" means the promoter who has the right of control of the conduct of an outdoor music festival who applies to the appropriate legislative authority for a license to hold an outdoor music festival.

2. "Issuing authority" means the legislative body of the local governmental unit where the site for an outdoor music festival is located.

3. "Outdoor music festival" or "music festival" or "festival" means an assembly of persons gathered primarily for outdoor, live or recorded musical entertainment, where the predicted attendance is two thousand persons or more and where the duration of the program is five hours or longer: PROVIDED, That this definition shall not be applied to any regularly established permanent place of worship, stadium, athletic field, arena, auditorium, coliseum, or other similar permanently established places of assembly for assemblies which do not exceed by more than two hundred fifty people the maximum seating capacity of the structure where the assembly is held: PROVIDED, FURTHER, That this definition shall not apply to government sponsored fairs held on regularly established fairgrounds nor to assemblies required to be licensed under other laws or regulations of the state.

4. "Participate" means to knowingly provide or deliver to the festival site supplies, materials, food, lumber, beverages, sound equipment, generators, or musical entertainment and/or to attend a music festival. A person shall be presumed to have knowingly provided as that phrase is used herein after he or she has been served with a court order.

5. "Promoter" means any person or other legal entity issued a permit to conduct an outdoor music festival.

\[ [2012 c 117 § 421](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/2011-12/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/Senate/6095.SL.pdf?cite=2012%20c%20117%20§%20421); [1971 ex.s. c 302 § 21](http://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1971ex1c302.pdf?cite=1971%20ex.s.%20c%20302%20§%2021); \]

## 70.108.030 - Permits—Required—Compliance with rules and regulations.
No person or other legal entity shall knowingly allow, conduct, hold, maintain, cause to be advertised or permit an outdoor music festival unless a valid permit has been obtained from the issuing authority for the operation of such music festival as provided for by this chapter. One such permit shall be required for each outdoor music festival. A permit may be granted for a period not to exceed sixteen consecutive days and a festival may be operated during any or all of the days within such period. Any person, persons, partnership, corporation, association, society, fraternal or social organization, failing to comply with the rules, regulations or conditions contained in this chapter shall be subject to the appropriate penalties as prescribed by this chapter.

\[ [1971 ex.s. c 302 § 22](http://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1971ex1c302.pdf?cite=1971%20ex.s.%20c%20302%20§%2022); \]

## 70.108.040 - Application for permit—Contents—Filing.
Application for an outdoor music festival permit shall be in writing and filed with the clerk of the issuing authority wherein the festival is to be held. Said application shall be filed not less than ninety days prior to the first scheduled day of the festival and shall be accompanied with a permit fee in the amount of two thousand five hundred dollars. Said application shall include:

1. The name of the person or other legal entity on behalf of whom said application is made: PROVIDED, That a natural person applying for such permit shall be eighteen years of age or older;

2. A financial statement of the applicant;

3. The nature of the business organization of the applicant;

4. Names and addresses of all individuals or other entities having a ten percent or more proprietary interest in the festival;

5. The principal place of business of applicant;

6. A legal description of the land to be occupied, the name and address of the owner thereof, together with a document showing the consent of said owner to the issuance of a permit, if the land be owned by a person other than the applicant;

7. The scheduled performances and program;

8. Written confirmation from the local health officer that he or she has reviewed and approved plans for site and development in accordance with rules, regulations and standards adopted by the state board of health. Such rules and regulations shall include criteria as to the following and such other matters as the state board of health deems necessary to protect the public's health:

   a. Submission of plans

   b. Site

   c. Water supply

   d. Sewage disposal

   e. Food preparation facilities

   f. Toilet facilities

   g. Solid waste

   h. Insect and rodent control

   i. Shelter

   j. Dust control

   k. Lighting

   l. Emergency medical facilities

   m. Emergency air evacuation

   n. Attendant physicians

   o. Communication systems

9. A written confirmation from the appropriate law enforcement agency from the area where the outdoor music festival is to take place, showing that traffic control and crowd protection policing have been contracted for or otherwise provided by the applicant meeting the following conditions:

   a. One person for each two hundred persons reasonably expected to be in attendance at any time during the event for purposes of traffic and crowd control.

   b. The names and addresses of all traffic and crowd control personnel shall be provided to the appropriate law enforcement authority: PROVIDED, That not less than twenty percent of the traffic and crowd control personnel shall be commissioned police officers or deputy sheriffs: PROVIDED FURTHER, That on and after February 25, 1972 any commissioned police officer or deputy sheriff who is employed and compensated by the promoter of an outdoor music festival shall not be eligible and shall not receive any benefits whatsoever from any public pension or disability plan of which he or she is a member for the time he is so employed or for any injuries received during the course of such employment.

   c. During the hours that the festival site shall be open to the public there shall be at least one regularly commissioned police officer employed by the jurisdiction wherein the festival site is located for every one thousand persons in attendance and said officer shall be on duty within the confines of the actual outdoor music festival site.

   d. All law enforcement personnel shall be charged with enforcing the provisions of this chapter and all existing statutes, ordinances and regulations.

10. A written confirmation from the appropriate law enforcement authority that sufficient access roads are available for ingress and egress to the parking areas of the outdoor music festival site and that parking areas are available on the actual site of the festival or immediately adjacent thereto which are capable of accommodating one auto for every four persons in estimated attendance at the outdoor music festival site.

11. A written confirmation from the department of natural resources, where applicable, and the chief of the Washington state patrol, through the director of fire protection, that all fire prevention requirements have been complied with.

12. A written statement of the applicant that all state and local law enforcement officers, fire control officers and other necessary governmental personnel shall have free access to the site of the outdoor music festival.

13. A statement that the applicant will abide by the provisions of this chapter.

14. The verification of the applicant warranting the truth of the matters set forth in the application to the best of the applicant's knowledge, under the penalty of perjury.

\[ [1995 c 369 § 59](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/1995-96/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/Senate/5093-S.SL.pdf?cite=1995%20c%20369%20§%2059); [1986 c 266 § 120](http://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1986c266.pdf?cite=1986%20c%20266%20§%20120); [1972 ex.s. c 123 § 1](http://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1972ex1c123.pdf?cite=1972%20ex.s.%20c%20123%20§%201); [1971 ex.s. c 302 § 23](http://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1971ex1c302.pdf?cite=1971%20ex.s.%20c%20302%20§%2023); \]

## 70.108.050 - Approval or denial of permit—Corrections—Procedure—Judicial review.
Within fifteen days after the filing of the application the issuing authority shall either approve or deny the permit to the applicant. Any denial shall set forth in detail the specific grounds therefor. The applicant shall have fifteen days after the receipt of such denial or such additional time as the issuing authority shall grant to correct the deficiencies set forth and the issuing authority shall within fifteen days after receipt of such corrections either approve or deny the permit. Any denial shall set forth in detail the specific grounds therefor.

After the applicant has filed corrections and the issuing authority has thereafter again denied the permit, the applicant may within five days after receipt of such second denial seek judicial review of such denial by filing a petition in the superior court for the county of the issuing authority. The review shall take precedence over all other civil actions and shall be conducted by the court without a jury. The court shall, upon request, hear oral argument and receive written briefs and shall either affirm the denial or order that the permit be issued. An applicant may not use any other procedure to obtain judicial review of a denial.

\[ [1972 ex.s. c 123 § 2](http://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1972ex1c123.pdf?cite=1972%20ex.s.%20c%20123%20§%202); [1971 ex.s. c 302 § 24](http://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1971ex1c302.pdf?cite=1971%20ex.s.%20c%20302%20§%2024); \]

## 70.108.060 - Reimbursement of expenses incurred in reviewing request.
Any local agency requested by an applicant to give written approval as required by RCW 70.108.040 may within fifteen days after the applicant has filed his or her application apply to the issuing authority for reimbursement of expenses reasonably incurred in reviewing such request. Upon a finding that such expenses were reasonably incurred, the issuing authority shall reimburse the local agency therefor from the funds of the permit fee. The issuing authority shall prior to the first scheduled date of the festival return to the applicant that portion of the permit fee remaining after all such reimbursements have been made.

\[ [2012 c 117 § 422](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/2011-12/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/Senate/6095.SL.pdf?cite=2012%20c%20117%20§%20422); [1971 ex.s. c 302 § 25](http://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1971ex1c302.pdf?cite=1971%20ex.s.%20c%20302%20§%2025); \]

## 70.108.070 - Cash deposit—Surety bond—Insurance.
After the application has been approved, the promoter shall deposit with the issuing authority, a cash deposit or surety bond. The bond or deposit shall be used to pay any costs or charges incurred to regulate health or to clean up afterwards outside the festival grounds or any extraordinary costs or charges incurred to regulate traffic or parking. The bond or other deposit shall be returned to the promoter when the issuing authority is satisfied that no claims for damage or loss will be made against said bond or deposit, or that the loss or damage claimed is less than the amount of the deposit, in which case the uncommitted balance thereof shall be returned: PROVIDED, That the bond or cash deposit or the uncommitted portion thereof shall be returned not later than thirty days after the last day of the festival.

In addition, the promoter shall be required to furnish evidence that he or she has in full force and effect a liability insurance policy in an amount of not less than one hundred thousand dollars bodily injury coverage per person covering any bodily injury negligently caused by any officer or employee of the festival while acting in the performance of his or her duties. The policy shall name the issuing authority of the permit as an additional named insured.

In addition, the promoter shall be required to furnish evidence that he or she has in full force and effect a one hundred thousand dollar liability property damage insurance policy covering any property damaged due to negligent failure by any officer or employee of the festival to carry out duties imposed by this chapter. The policy shall have the issuing authority of the permit as an additional named insured.

\[ [2012 c 117 § 423](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/2011-12/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/Senate/6095.SL.pdf?cite=2012%20c%20117%20§%20423); [1972 ex.s. c 123 § 3](http://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1972ex1c123.pdf?cite=1972%20ex.s.%20c%20123%20§%203); [1971 ex.s. c 302 § 26](http://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1971ex1c302.pdf?cite=1971%20ex.s.%20c%20302%20§%2026); \]

## 70.108.080 - Revocation of permits.
Revocation of any permit granted pursuant to this chapter shall not preclude the imposition of penalties as provided for in this chapter and the laws of the state of Washington. Any permit granted pursuant to the provisions of this chapter to conduct a music festival shall be summarily revoked by the issuing authority when it finds that by reason of emergency the public peace, health, safety, morals or welfare can only be preserved and protected by such revocation.

Any permit granted pursuant to the provisions of this chapter to conduct a music festival may otherwise be revoked for any material violation of this chapter or the laws of the state of Washington after a hearing held upon not less than three days notice served upon the promoter personally or by certified mail.

Every permit issued under the provisions of this chapter shall state that such permit is issued as a measure to protect and preserve the public peace, health, safety, morals and welfare, and that the right of the appropriate authority to revoke such permit is a consideration of its issuance.

\[ [1971 ex.s. c 302 § 27](http://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1971ex1c302.pdf?cite=1971%20ex.s.%20c%20302%20§%2027); \]

## 70.108.090 - Drugs prohibited.
No person, persons, partnership, corporation, association, society, fraternal or social organization to whom a music festival permit has been granted shall, during the time an outdoor music festival is in operation, knowingly permit or allow any person to bring upon the premises of said music festival, any narcotic or dangerous drug as defined by chapters *69.33 or 69.40 RCW, or knowingly permit or allow narcotic or dangerous drug to be consumed on the premises, and no person shall take or carry onto said premises any narcotic or dangerous drug.

\[ [1971 ex.s. c 302 § 28](http://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1971ex1c302.pdf?cite=1971%20ex.s.%20c%20302%20§%2028); \]

## 70.108.100 - Proximity to schools, churches, homes.
No music festival shall be operated in a location which is closer than one thousand yards from any schoolhouse or church, or five hundred yards from any house, residence or other human habitation unless waived by occupants.

\[ [1971 ex.s. c 302 § 29](http://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1971ex1c302.pdf?cite=1971%20ex.s.%20c%20302%20§%2029); \]

## 70.108.110 - Age of patrons.
No person under the age of sixteen years shall be admitted to any outdoor music festival without the escort of his or her parents or legal guardian and proof of age shall be provided upon request.

\[ [1971 ex.s. c 302 § 30](http://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1971ex1c302.pdf?cite=1971%20ex.s.%20c%20302%20§%2030); \]

## 70.108.120 - Permits—Posting—Transferability.
Any permit granted pursuant to this chapter shall be posted in a conspicuous place on the site of the outdoor music festival and such permit shall be not transferable or assignable without the consent of the issuing authority.

\[ [1971 ex.s. c 302 § 31](http://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1971ex1c302.pdf?cite=1971%20ex.s.%20c%20302%20§%2031); \]

## 70.108.130 - Penalty.
1. Except as otherwise provided in this section, any person who willfully fails to comply with the rules, regulations, and conditions set forth in this chapter or who aids or abets such a violation or failure to comply is guilty of a gross misdemeanor.

2. [Empty]

   a. Except as provided in (b) of this subsection, violation of such a rule, regulation, or condition relating to traffic including parking, standing, stopping, and pedestrian offenses is a traffic infraction.

   b. Violation of such a rule, regulation, or condition equivalent to those provisions of Title 46 RCW set forth in RCW 46.63.020 is a misdemeanor.

\[ [2003 c 53 § 359](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/2003-04/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/Senate/5758.SL.pdf?cite=2003%20c%2053%20§%20359); [1979 ex.s. c 136 § 104](http://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1979ex1c136.pdf?cite=1979%20ex.s.%20c%20136%20§%20104); [1971 ex.s. c 302 § 32](http://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1971ex1c302.pdf?cite=1971%20ex.s.%20c%20302%20§%2032); \]

## 70.108.140 - Inspection of books and records.
The department of revenue shall be allowed to inspect the books and records of any outdoor music festival during the period of operation of the festival and after the festival has concluded for the purpose of determining whether or not the tax laws of this state are complied with.

\[ [1972 ex.s. c 123 § 4](http://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1972ex1c123.pdf?cite=1972%20ex.s.%20c%20123%20§%204); \]

## 70.108.150 - Firearms—Penalty.
It shall be unlawful for any person, except law enforcement officers, to carry, transport, or convey, or to have in his or her possession or under his or her control any firearm while on the site of an outdoor music festival.

Any person violating the provisions of this section shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and upon conviction thereof shall be punished by a fine of not less than one hundred dollars and not more than two hundred dollars or by imprisonment in the county jail for not less than ten days and not more than ninety days or by both such fine and imprisonment.

\[ [2012 c 117 § 424](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/2011-12/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/Senate/6095.SL.pdf?cite=2012%20c%20117%20§%20424); [1972 ex.s. c 123 § 5](http://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1972ex1c123.pdf?cite=1972%20ex.s.%20c%20123%20§%205); \]

## 70.108.160 - Preparations—Completion requirements.
All preparations required to be made by the provisions of this chapter on the music festival site shall be completed thirty days prior to the first day scheduled for the festival. Upon such date or such earlier date when all preparations have been completed, the promoter shall notify the issuing authority thereof, and the issuing authority shall make an inspection of the festival site to determine if such preparations are in reasonably full compliance with plans submitted pursuant to RCW 70.108.040. If a material violation exists the issuing authority shall move to revoke the music festival permit in the manner provided by RCW 70.108.080.

\[ [1972 ex.s. c 123 § 6](http://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1972ex1c123.pdf?cite=1972%20ex.s.%20c%20123%20§%206); \]

## 70.108.170 - Local regulations and ordinances not precluded.
Nothing in this chapter shall be construed as precluding counties, cities and other political subdivisions of the state of Washington from enacting ordinances or regulations for the control and regulation of outdoor music festivals nor shall this chapter repeal any existing ordinances or regulations.

\[ [1972 ex.s. c 123 § 7](http://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1972ex1c123.pdf?cite=1972%20ex.s.%20c%20123%20§%207); \]

