# 70.180 - Rural health care.
* [70.180.005 - Finding—Health care professionals.](#70180005---findinghealth-care-professionals)
* [70.180.009 - Finding—Rural training opportunities.](#70180009---findingrural-training-opportunities)
* [70.180.011 - Definitions.](#70180011---definitions)
* [70.180.020 - Health professional temporary substitute resource pool.](#70180020---health-professional-temporary-substitute-resource-pool)
* [70.180.030 - Registry of health care professionals available to rural communities—Conditions of participation. (Effective until July 1, 2022.)](#70180030---registry-of-health-care-professionals-available-to-rural-communitiesconditions-of-participation-effective-until-july-1-2022)
* [70.180.040 - Request procedure—Acceptance of gifts.](#70180040---request-procedureacceptance-of-gifts)
* [70.180.110 - Rural training opportunities—Plan development.](#70180110---rural-training-opportunitiesplan-development)
* [70.180.120 - Midwifery—Statewide plan.](#70180120---midwiferystatewide-plan)
* [70.180.130 - Expenditures, funding.](#70180130---expenditures-funding)
## 70.180.005 - Finding—Health care professionals.
The legislature finds that a health care access problem exists in rural areas of the state because rural health care providers are unable to leave the community for short-term periods of time to attend required continuing education training or for personal matters because their absence would leave the community without adequate medical care coverage. The lack of adequate medical coverage in geographically remote rural communities constitutes a threat to the health and safety of the people in those communities.

The legislature declares that it is in the public interest to recruit and maintain a pool of physicians, physician assistants, pharmacists, and advanced registered nurse practitioners willing and able on short notice to practice in rural communities on a short-term basis to meet the medical needs of the community.

\[ [1991 c 332 § 27](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/1991-92/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/House/1960-S.SL.pdf?cite=1991%20c%20332%20§%2027); [1990 c 271 § 1](http://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1990c271.pdf?cite=1990%20c%20271%20§%201); \]

## 70.180.009 - Finding—Rural training opportunities.
The legislature finds that a shortage of physicians, nurses, pharmacists, and physician assistants exists in rural areas of the state. In addition, many education programs to train these health care providers do not include options for practical training experience in rural settings. As a result, many health care providers find their current training does not prepare them for the unique demands of rural practice.

The legislature declares that the availability of rural training opportunities as a part of professional medical, nursing, pharmacist, and physician assistant education would provide needed practical experience, serve to attract providers to rural areas, and help address the current shortage of these providers in rural Washington.

\[ [1990 c 271 § 14](http://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1990c271.pdf?cite=1990%20c%20271%20§%2014); \]

## 70.180.011 - Definitions.
Unless the context clearly requires otherwise, the definitions in this section apply throughout this chapter.

1. "Department" means the department of health.

2. "Rural areas" means a rural area in the state of Washington as identified by the department.

\[ [1991 c 332 § 29](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/1991-92/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/House/1960-S.SL.pdf?cite=1991%20c%20332%20§%2029); \]

## 70.180.020 - Health professional temporary substitute resource pool.
The department shall establish or contract for a health professional temporary substitute resource pool. The purpose of the pool is to provide short-term physician, physician assistant, pharmacist, and advanced registered nurse practitioner personnel to rural communities where these health care providers:

1. Are unavailable due to provider shortages;

2. Need time off from practice to attend continuing education and other training programs; and

3. Need time off from practice to attend to personal matters or recover from illness.

The health professional temporary substitute resource pool is intended to provide short-term assistance and should complement active health provider recruitment efforts by rural communities where shortages exist.

\[ [1994 c 103 § 1](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/1993-94/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/House/2508.SL.pdf?cite=1994%20c%20103%20§%201); [1990 c 271 § 2](http://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1990c271.pdf?cite=1990%20c%20271%20§%202); \]

## 70.180.030 - Registry of health care professionals available to rural communities—Conditions of participation. (Effective until July 1, 2022.)
1. The department, in cooperation with the University of Washington school of medicine, the state's registered nursing programs, the state's pharmacy programs, and other appropriate public and private agencies and associations, shall develop and keep current a register of physicians, physician assistants, pharmacists, and advanced registered nurse practitioners who are available to practice on a short-term basis in rural communities of the state. The department shall list only individuals who have a valid license to practice. The register shall be compiled and made available to all rural hospitals, public health departments and districts, rural pharmacies, and other appropriate public and private agencies and associations. 

2. Eligible health care professionals are those licensed under chapters 18.57, 18.57A, 18.64, 18.71, and 18.71A RCW and advanced registered nurse practitioners licensed under chapter 18.79 RCW.

3. Participating sites may:

    a. Receive reimbursement for substitute provider travel to and from the rural community and for lodging at a rate determined under RCW 43.03.050 and 43.03.060; and

    b. Receive reimbursement for the cost of malpractice insurance if the services provided are not covered by the substitute provider's or local provider's existing medical malpractice insurance. Reimbursement for malpractice insurance shall only be made available to sites that incur additional costs for substitute provider coverage.

4. The department may require rural communities to participate in health professional recruitment programs as a condition for providing a temporary substitute health care professional if the community does not have adequate permanent health care personnel. To the extent deemed appropriate and subject to funding, the department may also require communities to participate in other programs or projects, such as the rural health system project authorized in chapter 70.175 RCW, that are designed to assist communities to reorganize the delivery of rural health care services.

5. A participating site may receive reimbursement for substitute provider assistance as provided for in subsection (3) of this section for up to ninety days during any twelve-month period. The department may modify or waive this limitation should it determine that the health and safety of the community warrants a waiver or modification. 

6. Participating sites shall:

    a. Be responsible for all salary expenses for the temporary substitute provider.

    b. Provide the temporary substitute provider with referral and backup coverage information.

\[ [1994 sp.s. c 9 § 746](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/1993-94/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/House/2676-S.SL.pdf?cite=1994%20sp.s.%20c%209%20§%20746); [1994 c 103 § 2](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/1993-94/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/House/2508.SL.pdf?cite=1994%20c%20103%20§%202); [1990 c 271 § 3](http://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1990c271.pdf?cite=1990%20c%20271%20§%203); \]

## 70.180.040 - Request procedure—Acceptance of gifts.
1. Requests for a temporary substitute health care professional may be made to the department by the certified health plan, local rural hospital, public health department or district, community health clinic, local practicing physician, physician assistant, pharmacist, or advanced registered nurse practitioner, or local city or county government.

2. The department may provide directly or contract for services to:

    a. Establish a manner and form for receiving requests;

    b. Minimize paperwork and compliance requirements for participant health care professionals and entities requesting assistance; and

    c. Respond promptly to all requests for assistance.

3. The department may apply for, receive, and accept gifts and other payments, including property and services, from any governmental or other public or private entity or person, and may make arrangements as to the use of these receipts to operate the pool. The department shall make available upon request to the appropriate legislative committees information concerning the source, amount, and use of such gifts or payments.

\[ [1994 c 103 § 3](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/1993-94/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/House/2508.SL.pdf?cite=1994%20c%20103%20§%203); [1990 c 271 § 4](http://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1990c271.pdf?cite=1990%20c%20271%20§%204); \]

## 70.180.110 - Rural training opportunities—Plan development.
1. The department, in consultation with at least the student achievement council, the state board for community and technical colleges, the superintendent of public instruction, and state-supported education programs in medicine, pharmacy, and nursing, shall develop a plan for increasing rural training opportunities for students in medicine, pharmacy, and nursing. The plan shall provide for direct exposure to rural health professional practice conditions for students planning careers in medicine, pharmacy, and nursing.

2. The department and the medical, pharmacy, and nurse education programs shall:

    a. Inventory existing rural-based clinical experience programs, including internships, clerkships, residencies, and other training opportunities available to students pursuing degrees in nursing, pharmacy, and medicine;

    b. Identify where training opportunities do not currently exist and are needed;

    c. Develop recommendations for improving the availability of rural training opportunities;

    d. Develop recommendations on establishing agreements between education programs to assure that all students in medical, pharmacist, and nurse education programs in the state have access to rural training opportunities; and

    e. Review private and public funding sources to finance rural-based training opportunities.

\[ [2012 c 229 § 593](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/2011-12/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/House/2483-S2.SL.pdf?cite=2012%20c%20229%20§%20593); [1998 c 245 § 120](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/1997-98/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/Senate/6219.SL.pdf?cite=1998%20c%20245%20§%20120); [1990 c 271 § 15](http://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1990c271.pdf?cite=1990%20c%20271%20§%2015); \]

## 70.180.120 - Midwifery—Statewide plan.
The department, in consultation with training programs that lead to licensure in midwifery and certification as a certified nurse midwife, and other appropriate private and public groups, shall develop a statewide plan to address access to midwifery services.

The plan shall include at least the following: (1) Identification of maternity service shortage areas in the state where midwives could reduce the shortage of services; (2) an inventory of current training programs and preceptorship activities available to train licensed and certified nurse midwives; (3) identification of gaps in the availability of training due to such factors as geographic or economic conditions that prevent individuals from seeking training; (4) identification of other barriers to utilizing midwives; (5) identification of strategies to train future midwives such as developing training programs at community colleges and universities, using innovative telecommunications for training in rural areas, and establishing preceptorship programs accessible to prospective midwives in shortage areas; (6) development of recruitment strategies; and (7) estimates of expected costs associated in recruitment and training.

The plan shall identify the most expeditious and cost-efficient manner to recruit and train midwives to meet the current shortages. Plan development and implementation shall be coordinated with other state policy efforts directed toward, but not limited to, maternity care access, rural health care system organization, and provider recruitment for shortage and medically underserved areas of the state.

\[ [1998 c 245 § 121](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/1997-98/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/Senate/6219.SL.pdf?cite=1998%20c%20245%20§%20121); [1990 c 271 § 16](http://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1990c271.pdf?cite=1990%20c%20271%20§%2016); \]

## 70.180.130 - Expenditures, funding.
Any additional expenditures incurred by the University of Washington from provisions of chapter 271, Laws of 1990 shall be funded from existing financial resources.

\[ [1990 c 271 § 28](http://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1990c271.pdf?cite=1990%20c%20271%20§%2028); \]

