# 70.200 - Donations for children.
* [70.200.010 - Definitions.](#70200010---definitions)
* [70.200.020 - Immunity from liability.](#70200020---immunity-from-liability)
* [70.200.030 - Construction—Liability, penalty.](#70200030---constructionliability-penalty)
## 70.200.010 - Definitions.
Unless the context clearly requires otherwise, the definitions in this section apply throughout this chapter.

1. "Distributing organization" means a charitable nonprofit organization under 26 U.S.C. Sec. 501(c) of the federal internal revenue code, or a public health agency acting on behalf of or in conjunction with a charitable nonprofit organization, which distributes children's items to needy persons free of charge and includes any nonprofit organization that distributes children's items free of charge to other nonprofit organizations or the public. A public health agency shall not otherwise be considered a distributing organization for purposes of this chapter when it is carrying out other functions and responsibilities under Title 70 RCW.

2. "Donor" means a person, corporation, association, or other organization that donates children's items to a distributing organization or a person, corporation, association, or other organization that repairs or updates such donated items to current standards. Donor also includes any person, corporation, association, or other organization which donates any space in which storage or distribution of children's items takes place.

3. "Children's items" include, but are not limited to, clothes, diapers, food, baby formula, cribs, playpens, car seat restraints, toys, high chairs, and books.

\[ [1997 c 40 § 1](https://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/1997-98/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/Senate/5375-S.SL.pdf?cite=1997%20c%2040%20§%201); [1994 c 25 § 1](https://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/1993-94/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/House/2566-S.SL.pdf?cite=1994%20c%2025%20§%201); \]

## 70.200.020 - Immunity from liability.
Donors and distributing organizations are not liable for civil damages or criminal penalties resulting from the nature, age, condition, or packaging of the donated children's items unless a donor or distributing organization acts with gross negligence or intentional misconduct.

\[ [1994 c 25 § 2](https://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/1993-94/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/House/2566-S.SL.pdf?cite=1994%20c%2025%20§%202); \]

## 70.200.030 - Construction—Liability, penalty.
Nothing in this chapter may be construed to create any liability of, or penalty against a donor or distributing organization except as provided in RCW 70.200.020.

\[ [1994 c 25 § 3](https://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/1993-94/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/House/2566-S.SL.pdf?cite=1994%20c%2025%20§%203); \]

