# 70.350 - Dental health aide therapists.
* [70.350.010 - Definitions.](#70350010---definitions)
* [70.350.020 - Authorization—Conditions.](#70350020---authorizationconditions)
## 70.350.010 - Definitions.
The definitions in this section apply throughout this chapter unless the context clearly requires otherwise.

1. "Dental health aide therapist" means a person who has met the training and education requirements, and satisfies other conditions, to be certified as a dental health aide therapist by a federal community health aide program certification board or by a federally recognized Indian tribe that has adopted certification standards that meet or exceed the requirements of a federal community health aide program certification board. 

2. "Federal community health aide program" means a program operated by the Indian health service under the applicable provisions of the Indian health care improvement act, 25 U.S.C. Sec. 1616l.

3. "Indian health program" has the same meaning as the definition provided in the Indian health care improvement act, 25 U.S.C. Sec. 1603, as that definition existed on July 23, 2017.

\[ [2017 c 5 § 3](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/2017-18/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/Senate/5079-S.SL.pdf?cite=2017%20c%205%20§%203); \]

## 70.350.020 - Authorization—Conditions.
1. Dental health aide therapist services are authorized by this chapter under the following conditions:

   a. The person providing services is certified as a dental health aide therapist by:

      i. A federal community health aide program certification board; or

      ii. A federally recognized Indian tribe that has adopted certification standards that meet or exceed the requirements of a federal community health aide program certification board;

   b. All services are performed:

      i. In a practice setting within the exterior boundaries of a tribal reservation and operated by an Indian health program;

      ii. In accordance with the standards adopted by the certifying body in (a) of this subsection, including scope of practice, training, supervision, and continuing education;

      iii. Pursuant to any applicable written standing orders by a supervising dentist; and

      iv. On persons who are members of a federally recognized tribe or otherwise eligible for services under Indian health service criteria, pursuant to the Indian health care improvement act, 25 U.S.C. Sec. 1601 et seq.

2. The performance of dental health aide therapist services is authorized for a person when working within the scope, supervision, and direction of a dental health aide therapy training program that is certified by an entity described in subsection (1) of this section.

3. All services performed within the scope of subsection (1) or (2) of this section, including the employment or supervision of such services, are exempt from licensing requirements under chapters 18.29, 18.32, 18.260, and 18.350 RCW.

\[ [2017 c 5 § 2](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/2017-18/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/Senate/5079-S.SL.pdf?cite=2017%20c%205%20§%202); \]

