# 22.32 - General penalties.
* [22.32.010 - Warehouse operator or carrier refusing to issue receipt.](#2232010---warehouse-operator-or-carrier-refusing-to-issue-receipt)
* [22.32.020 - Fictitious bill of lading and receipt.](#2232020---fictitious-bill-of-lading-and-receipt)
* [22.32.030 - Fraudulent tampering with or mixing goods.](#2232030---fraudulent-tampering-with-or-mixing-goods)
* [22.32.040 - Issuance of second receipt not marked "duplicate."](#2232040---issuance-of-second-receipt-not-marked-duplicate)
* [22.32.050 - Delivery of goods without taking up receipt.](#2232050---delivery-of-goods-without-taking-up-receipt)
## 22.32.010 - Warehouse operator or carrier refusing to issue receipt.
Every person or corporation, and every officer, agent and employee thereof, receiving any goods, wares or merchandise, for sale or on commission, for storage, carriage or forwarding, who, having an opportunity to inspect the same, shall fail or refuse to deliver to the owner thereof a receipt duly signed, bearing the date of issuance, describing the goods, wares or merchandise received and the quantity, quality and condition thereof, and specifying the terms and conditions upon which they are received, shall be guilty of a misdemeanor.

\[ [1909 c 249 § 391](https://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1909c249.pdf?cite=1909%20c%20249%20§%20391); RRS § 2643; \]

## 22.32.020 - Fictitious bill of lading and receipt.
Every person or corporation engaged wholly or in part in the business of a common carrier or warehouse operator, and every officer, agent or employee thereof, who shall issue any bill of lading, receipt or other voucher by which it shall appear that any goods, wares or merchandise have been received by such carrier or warehouse operator, unless the same have been so received and shall be at the time actually under his or her control, or who shall issue any bill of lading, receipt or voucher containing any false statement concerning any material matter, shall be guilty of a gross misdemeanor. But no person shall be convicted under this section for the reason that the contents of any barrel, box, case, cask or other closed vessel or package mentioned in the bill of lading, receipt or voucher did not correspond with the description thereof in such instrument, if such description corresponds substantially with the mark on the outside of such barrel, box, case, cask, vessel or package, unless it appears that the defendant knew that such marks were untrue.

\[ [2011 c 336 § 652](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/2011-12/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/Senate/5045.SL.pdf?cite=2011%20c%20336%20§%20652); [1909 c 249 § 392](https://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1909c249.pdf?cite=1909%20c%20249%20§%20392); RRS § 2644; [1891 c 69 § 7](https://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1891c69.pdf?cite=1891%20c%2069%20§%207); Code 1881 § 836; [1873 p 193 § 62](https://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/Pages/session_laws.aspx?cite=1873%20p%20193%20§%2062); [1854 p 85 § 56](https://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/Pages/session_laws.aspx?cite=1854%20p%2085%20§%2056); \]

## 22.32.030 - Fraudulent tampering with or mixing goods.
Every person mentioned in RCW 22.32.020, who shall fraudulently mix or tamper with any goods, wares or merchandise under his or her control, shall be guilty of a gross misdemeanor.

\[ [2011 c 336 § 653](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/2011-12/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/Senate/5045.SL.pdf?cite=2011%20c%20336%20§%20653); [1909 c 249 § 393](https://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1909c249.pdf?cite=1909%20c%20249%20§%20393); RRS § 2645; \]

## 22.32.040 - Issuance of second receipt not marked "duplicate."
Every person mentioned in RCW 22.32.020, who shall issue any second or duplicate receipt or voucher of the kind specified in said section, while a former receipt or voucher for the goods, wares or merchandise specified in such second receipt is outstanding and uncanceled, without writing across the face of the same the word "Duplicate," in a plain and legible manner, shall be guilty of a misdemeanor.

\[ [1909 c 249 § 394](https://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1909c249.pdf?cite=1909%20c%20249%20§%20394); RRS § 2646; \]

## 22.32.050 - Delivery of goods without taking up receipt.
Each person mentioned in RCW 22.32.020 who shall deliver to another any goods, wares or merchandise for which a bill of lading, receipt or voucher has been issued, unless such bill of lading, receipt or voucher is surrendered and canceled or a lawful and sufficient bond or undertaking is given therefor at the time of such delivery, or unless, in case of a partial delivery, a memorandum thereof is endorsed upon such bill of lading, receipt or voucher, shall be guilty of a misdemeanor.

\[ [1909 c 249 § 395](https://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1909c249.pdf?cite=1909%20c%20249%20§%20395); RRS § 2647; \]

