# 13.16 - Places of detention.
* [13.16.020 - Lack of detention facilities constitutes emergency.](#1316020---lack-of-detention-facilities-constitutes-emergency)
* [13.16.030 - Mandatory function of counties.](#1316030---mandatory-function-of-counties)
* [13.16.040 - Counties authorized to acquire facilities and employ adequate staffs.](#1316040---counties-authorized-to-acquire-facilities-and-employ-adequate-staffs)
* [13.16.050 - Federal or state aid.](#1316050---federal-or-state-aid)
* [13.16.060 - Statutory debt limits may be exceeded.](#1316060---statutory-debt-limits-may-be-exceeded)
* [13.16.070 - Bonds may be issued without vote of electors.](#1316070---bonds-may-be-issued-without-vote-of-electors)
* [13.16.080 - Allocation of budgeted funds.](#1316080---allocation-of-budgeted-funds)
* [13.16.085 - Financial responsibility for cost of detention.](#1316085---financial-responsibility-for-cost-of-detention)
* [13.16.100 - Motion pictures.](#1316100---motion-pictures)
## 13.16.020 - Lack of detention facilities constitutes emergency.
The attention of the legislature having been called to the absence of juvenile detention facilities in the various counties of the state, the legislature hereby declares that this situation constitutes an emergency demanding the invocation by the several counties affected of the emergency powers granted by virtue of RCW 36.40.140 through 36.40.200.

\[ [1945 c 188 § 1](http://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1945c188.pdf?cite=1945%20c%20188%20§%201); Rem. Supp. 1945 § 2004-1; \]

## 13.16.030 - Mandatory function of counties.
The construction, acquisition and maintenance of juvenile detention facilities for dependent, wayward and delinquent children, separate and apart from the detention facilities for adults, is hereby declared to be a mandatory function of the several counties of the state.

\[ [1945 c 188 § 2](http://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1945c188.pdf?cite=1945%20c%20188%20§%202); Rem. Supp. 1945 § 2004-2; \]

## 13.16.040 - Counties authorized to acquire facilities and employ adequate staffs.
Boards of county commissioners in the various counties now suffering from a lack of adequate detention facilities for dependent, delinquent and wayward children shall, in the manner provided by law, declare an emergency and appropriate, in the manner provided by law, sufficient funds to meet all demands for adequate care of dependent, delinquent and wayward children. All appropriations made under the provisions of RCW 13.16.020 through 13.16.080 are to be used exclusively for the acquisition, purchase, construction or leasing of real and personal property and the employment and payment of salaries for an adequate staff of juvenile officers and necessary clerical staff and assistants and for furnishing suitable food, clothing and recreational facilities for dependent, delinquent and wayward children.

\[ [1945 c 188 § 3](http://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1945c188.pdf?cite=1945%20c%20188%20§%203); Rem. Supp. 1945 § 2004-3; \]

## 13.16.050 - Federal or state aid.
In connection with the financing of facilities and the employment of a staff of juvenile officers for dependent, delinquent and wayward children, the various boards of county commissioners affected shall attempt to secure such advances, loans, grants in aid, donations as gifts as may be secured from the federal government or any of its agencies or from the state government or from other public or private institutions or individuals.

\[ [1945 c 188 § 4](http://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1945c188.pdf?cite=1945%20c%20188%20§%204); Rem. Supp. 1945 § 2004-4; \]

## 13.16.060 - Statutory debt limits may be exceeded.
Appropriations made under authority and by virtue of RCW 13.16.020 through 13.16.080 and debts incurred by any county in carrying out the provisions of RCW 13.16.020 through 13.16.080 may exceed all statutory limitations otherwise applicable and limiting the debt any county may incur.

\[ [1945 c 188 § 5](http://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1945c188.pdf?cite=1945%20c%20188%20§%205); Rem. Supp. 1945 § 2004-5; \]

## 13.16.070 - Bonds may be issued without vote of electors.
In order to carry out the provisions of RCW 13.16.020 through 13.16.080 the several counties affected shall utilize any and all methods available to them by law for financing the program authorized by RCW 13.16.020 through 13.16.080 and may fund any and all debts incurred by the issuance of general obligation bonds of the county in the manner provided by law, without submitting the same to a vote of the people.

\[ [1945 c 188 § 6](http://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1945c188.pdf?cite=1945%20c%20188%20§%206); Rem. Supp. 1945 § 2004-6; \]

## 13.16.080 - Allocation of budgeted funds.
In order to carry out the provisions of RCW 13.16.020 through 13.16.080 the board of county commissioners is hereby authorized, any law to the contrary notwithstanding, to allocate any funds that may be available in any item or class of the budget as presently constituted to the fund to be used to carry out the provisions of RCW 13.16.020 through 13.16.080.

\[ [1945 c 188 § 7](http://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1945c188.pdf?cite=1945%20c%20188%20§%207); Rem. Supp. 1945 § 2004-7; \]

## 13.16.085 - Financial responsibility for cost of detention.
In any case in which a child under eighteen years of age has been placed in any detention facility under the jurisdiction of the juvenile court, the court may inquire into the facts concerning the necessity or propriety of such child's detention notwithstanding the fact that such child may not have been found to be either a dependent or a delinquent child.

The court may, either in the proceedings involving the question of dependency or delinquency of such child or in a separate proceeding, upon the parent or parents, guardian, or other person having custody of said child being duly summoned or voluntarily appearing, proceed to inquire into the necessity or propriety of such detention and into the ability of such person or persons to pay the cost of such detention.

If the court finds that such detention was necessary or proper for the welfare of the child or for the protection of the community, and if the court also finds the parent or parents, guardian, or other person having the custody of such child able to pay or contribute to the payment of the cost of such detention, the court may enter such order or decree as shall be equitable in the premises, and may enforce the same by execution or in any way a court of equity may enforce its decrees.

\[ [1955 c 369 § 1](http://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1955c369.pdf?cite=1955%20c%20369%20§%201); \]

## 13.16.100 - Motion pictures.
Motion pictures unrated after November 1968 or rated R, X, or NC-17 by the motion picture association of America shall not be shown in juvenile detention facilities or facilities operated by the department of children, youth, and families.

\[ [2017 3rd sp.s. c 6 § 629](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/2017-18/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/House/1661-S2.SL.pdf?cite=2017%203rd%20sp.s.%20c%206%20§%20629); [1994 sp.s. c 7 § 807](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/1993-94/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/House/2319-S2.SL.pdf?cite=1994%20sp.s.%20c%207%20§%20807); \]

