# 68.64 - Uniform anatomical gift act.
* [68.64.010 - Definitions.](#6864010---definitions)
* [68.64.020 - Scope.](#6864020---scope)
* [68.64.030 - Persons authorized to make an anatomical gift—During life of donor.](#6864030---persons-authorized-to-make-an-anatomical-giftduring-life-of-donor)
* [68.64.040 - Manner in which an anatomical gift may be made.](#6864040---manner-in-which-an-anatomical-gift-may-be-made)
* [68.64.050 - Amending or revoking an anatomical gift.](#6864050---amending-or-revoking-an-anatomical-gift)
* [68.64.060 - Refusal to make an anatomical gift.](#6864060---refusal-to-make-an-anatomical-gift)
* [68.64.070 - Making, amending, or revoking a gift by a person other than donor—Making additional gifts.](#6864070---making-amending-or-revoking-a-gift-by-a-person-other-than-donormaking-additional-gifts)
* [68.64.080 - Persons authorized to make an anatomical gift—After donor's death.](#6864080---persons-authorized-to-make-an-anatomical-giftafter-donors-death)
* [68.64.090 - Manner in which an anatomical gift may be made—After donor's death.](#6864090---manner-in-which-an-anatomical-gift-may-be-madeafter-donors-death)
* [68.64.100 - Persons to whom an anatomical gift may be made.](#6864100---persons-to-whom-an-anatomical-gift-may-be-made)
* [68.64.105 - Document of gift—Validity requirements.](#6864105---document-of-giftvalidity-requirements)
* [68.64.110 - Document of gift or refusal—Examination and copying.](#6864110---document-of-gift-or-refusalexamination-and-copying)
* [68.64.120 - Procurement organizations—Reasonable examinations—Donee's rights—Physician removal of donated part.](#6864120---procurement-organizationsreasonable-examinationsdonees-rightsphysician-removal-of-donated-part)
* [68.64.130 - Nonnative English speakers—Interpreter services and translations.](#6864130---nonnative-english-speakersinterpreter-services-and-translations)
* [68.64.140 - Hospitals—Agreements or affiliations with procurement organizations required.](#6864140---hospitalsagreements-or-affiliations-with-procurement-organizations-required)
* [68.64.150 - Illegal purchases or sales—Felony.](#6864150---illegal-purchases-or-salesfelony)
* [68.64.160 - Illegal financial gain—Altering a document, amendment, or revocation of gift—Felony.](#6864160---illegal-financial-gainaltering-a-document-amendment-or-revocation-of-giftfelony)
* [68.64.170 - Liability.](#6864170---liability)
* [68.64.180 - Declarations or advance health care directives—Conflicts with medical suitability measures.](#6864180---declarations-or-advance-health-care-directivesconflicts-with-medical-suitability-measures)
* [68.64.190 - Coroner or medical examiner—Duties.](#6864190---coroner-or-medical-examinerduties)
* [68.64.200 - Organ and tissue donor registry.](#6864200---organ-and-tissue-donor-registry)
* [68.64.210 - Organ and tissue donation awareness account.](#6864210---organ-and-tissue-donation-awareness-account)
* [68.64.900 - Short title.](#6864900---short-title)
* [68.64.901 - Applicable state laws.](#6864901---applicable-state-laws)
* [68.64.902 - Uniformity of application and construction—2008 c 139.](#6864902---uniformity-of-application-and-construction2008-c-139)
* [68.64.903 - Supersedes, in part, the federal electronic signatures in global and national commerce act.](#6864903---supersedes-in-part-the-federal-electronic-signatures-in-global-and-national-commerce-act)
## **68.64.010 - Definitions.**
The definitions in this section apply throughout this chapter unless the context clearly requires otherwise.

1. "Adult" means an individual who is at least eighteen years old.

2. "Agent" means an individual:

    a. Authorized to make health care decisions on the principal's behalf by a power of attorney for health care; or

    b. Expressly authorized to make an anatomical gift on the principal's behalf by any other record signed by the principal.

3. "Anatomical gift" means a donation of all or part of a human body to take effect after the donor's death for the purpose of transplantation, therapy, research, or education.

4. "Decedent" means a deceased individual whose body or part is or may be the source of an anatomical gift.

5. "Disinterested witness" means a witness other than the spouse or state registered domestic partner, child, parent, sibling, grandchild, grandparent, or guardian of the individual who makes, amends, revokes, or refuses to make an anatomical gift. The term does not include a person to which an anatomical gift could pass under RCW 68.64.100.

6. "Document of gift" means a donor card or other record used to make an anatomical gift. The term includes a statement or symbol on a driver's license, identification card, or donor registry.

7. "Donor" means an individual whose body or part is the subject of an anatomical gift.

8. "Donor registry" means a database that contains records of anatomical gifts and amendments to or revocations of anatomical gifts.

9. "Driver's license" means a license or permit issued by the department of licensing to operate a vehicle, whether or not conditions are attached to the license or permit.

10. "Eye bank" means a person that is licensed, accredited, or regulated under federal or state law to engage in the recovery, screening, testing, processing, storage, or distribution of human eyes or portions of human eyes.

11. "Guardian" means a person appointed by a court to make decisions regarding the support, care, education, health, or welfare of an individual. The term does not include a guardian ad litem.

12. "Hospital" means a facility licensed as a hospital under the law of any state or a facility operated as a hospital by the United States, a state, or a subdivision of a state.

13. "Identification card" means an identification card issued by the department of licensing.

14. "Know" means to have actual knowledge.

15. "Minor" means an individual who is less than eighteen years old.

16. "Organ procurement organization" means a person designated by the secretary of the United States department of health and human services as an organ procurement organization.

17. "Parent" means a parent whose parental rights have not been terminated.

18. "Part" means an organ, an eye, or tissue of a human being. The term does not include the whole body.

19. "Person" means an individual, corporation, business trust, estate, trust, partnership, limited liability company, association, joint venture, public corporation, government or governmental subdivision, agency, or instrumentality, or any other legal or commercial entity.

20. "Physician" means an individual licensed or otherwise authorized to practice medicine and surgery or osteopathic medicine and surgery under the law of any state.

21. "Procurement organization" means an eye bank, organ procurement organization, or tissue bank.

22. "Prospective donor" means an individual whose death is imminent and has been determined by a procurement organization to have a part that could be medically suitable for transplantation, therapy, research, or education. "Prospective donor" does not include an individual who has made a refusal.

23. "Reasonable costs" include: (a) Programming and software installation and upgrades; (b) employee training that is specific to the organ and tissue donor registry or the donation program created in RCW 46.16A.090(2); (c) literature that is specific to the organ and tissue donor registry or the donation program created in RCW 46.16A.090(2); and (d) hardware upgrades or other issues important to the organ and tissue donor registry or the donation program created in RCW 46.16A.090(2) that have been mutually agreed upon in advance by the department of licensing and the Washington state organ procurement organizations.

24. "Reasonably available" means able to be contacted by a procurement organization without undue effort and willing and able to act in a timely manner consistent with existing medical criteria necessary for the making of an anatomical gift.

25. "Recipient" means an individual into whose body a decedent's part has been or is intended to be transplanted.

26. "Record" means information that is inscribed on a tangible medium or that is stored in an electronic or other medium and is retrievable in perceivable form.

27. "Refusal" means a record created under RCW 68.64.060 that expressly states an intent to bar other persons from making an anatomical gift of an individual's body or part.

28. "Sign" means, with the present intent to authenticate or adopt a record:

    a. To execute or adopt a tangible symbol; or

    b. To attach to or logically associate with the record an electronic symbol, sound, or process.

29. "State" means a state of the United States, the District of Columbia, Puerto Rico, the United States Virgin Islands, or any territory or insular possession subject to the jurisdiction of the United States.

30. "Technician" means an individual determined to be qualified to remove or process parts by an appropriate organization that is licensed, accredited, or regulated under federal or state law. The term includes an enucleator.

31. **"Time urgent organ" means an organ being transported for human transplant that a member of the transplant team or a representative of the organ procurement organization declares an emergency.**

32. "Tissue" means a portion of the human body other than an organ or an eye. The term does not include blood unless the blood is donated for the purpose of research or education.

33. "Tissue bank" means a person that is licensed to conduct business in this state, accredited, and regulated under federal or state law to engage in the recovery, screening, testing, processing, storage, or distribution of tissue.

34. "Transplant hospital" means a hospital that furnishes organ transplants and other medical and surgical specialty services required for the care of transplant patients.

35. "Washington state organ procurement organization" means an organ procurement organization that has been designated by the United States department of health and human services to coordinate organ procurement activities for any portion of Washington state.

## 68.64.020 - Scope.
This chapter applies to an anatomical gift or amendment to, revocation of, or refusal to make an anatomical gift, whenever made.

\[ [2008 c 139 § 3](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/2007-08/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/House/1637-S.SL.pdf?cite=2008%20c%20139%20§%203); \]

## 68.64.030 - Persons authorized to make an anatomical gift—During life of donor.
Subject to RCW 68.64.070, an anatomical gift of a donor's body or part may be made during the life of the donor in the manner provided in RCW 68.64.040 by:

1. The donor, if the donor is an adult or if the donor is a minor and is:

   a. Emancipated; or

   b. Authorized under state law to apply for a driver's license because the donor is at least fifteen and one-half years old;

2. An agent of the donor, unless the power of attorney for health care or other record prohibits the agent from making an anatomical gift;

3. A parent of the donor, if the donor is an unemancipated minor; provided, however, that an anatomical gift made pursuant to this subsection shall cease to be valid once the donor becomes either an emancipated minor or an adult; or

4. The donor's guardian.

\[ [2008 c 139 § 4](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/2007-08/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/House/1637-S.SL.pdf?cite=2008%20c%20139%20§%204); \]

## 68.64.040 - Manner in which an anatomical gift may be made.
1. A donor may make an anatomical gift:

   a. By authorizing a statement or symbol indicating that the donor has made an anatomical gift to be imprinted on the donor's driver's license or identification card;

   b. In a will;

   c. During a terminal illness or injury of the donor, by any form of communication addressed to at least two adults, at least one of whom is a disinterested witness; or 

   d. As provided in subsection (2) of this section.

2. A donor or other person authorized to make an anatomical gift under RCW 68.64.030 may make a gift by a donor card or other record signed by the donor or other person making the gift or by authorizing that a statement or symbol indicating that the donor has made an anatomical gift be included on a donor registry. If the donor or other person is physically unable to sign a record, the record may be signed by another individual at the direction of the donor or other person and must:

   a. Be witnessed by at least two adults, at least one of whom is a disinterested witness, who have signed at the request of the donor or the other person; and

   b. State that it has been signed and witnessed as provided in (a) of this subsection.

3. Revocation, suspension, expiration, or cancellation of a driver's license or identification card through which an anatomical gift has been made does not invalidate the gift.

4. An anatomical gift made by will takes effect upon the donor's death whether or not the will is probated. Invalidation of the will after the donor's death does not invalidate the gift.

\[ [2008 c 139 § 5](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/2007-08/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/House/1637-S.SL.pdf?cite=2008%20c%20139%20§%205); \]

## 68.64.050 - Amending or revoking an anatomical gift.
1. Subject to RCW 68.64.070, a donor or other person authorized to make an anatomical gift under RCW 68.64.030 may amend or revoke an anatomical gift by:

   a. A record signed by:

      i. The donor;

      ii. The other person; or

      iii. Subject to subsection (2) of this section, another individual acting at the direction of the donor or the other person if the donor or other person is physically unable to sign; or

   b. A later-executed document of gift that amends or revokes a previous anatomical gift or portion of an anatomical gift, either expressly or by inconsistency.

2. A record signed pursuant to subsection (1)(a)(iii) of this section must:

   a. Be witnessed by at least two adults, at least one of whom is a disinterested witness, who have signed at the request of the donor or the other person; and

   b. State that it has been signed and witnessed as provided in (a) of this subsection.

3. Subject to RCW 68.64.070, a donor or other person authorized to make an anatomical gift under RCW 68.64.030 may revoke an anatomical gift by the destruction or cancellation of the document of gift, or the portion of the document of gift used to make the gift, with the intent to revoke the gift. The donor or other person shall notify the Washington organ procurement organization of the destruction or cancellation of the document of gift for the purpose of removing the individual's name from the organ and tissue donor registry created in RCW 68.64.200. If the Washington state organ procurement organization that is notified does not maintain a registry for Washington residents, it shall notify all Washington state procurement organizations that do maintain such a registry.

4. A donor may amend or revoke an anatomical gift that was not made in a will by any form of communication during a terminal illness or injury addressed to at least two adults, at least one of whom is a disinterested witness.

5. A donor who makes an anatomical gift in a will may amend or revoke the gift in the manner provided for amendment or revocation of wills or as provided in subsection (1) of this section.

\[ [2008 c 139 § 6](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/2007-08/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/House/1637-S.SL.pdf?cite=2008%20c%20139%20§%206); \]

## 68.64.060 - Refusal to make an anatomical gift.
1. An individual may refuse to make an anatomical gift of the individual's body or part by:

   a. A record signed by:

      i. The individual; or

      ii. Subject to subsection (2) of this section, another individual acting at the direction of the individual if the individual is physically unable to sign;

   b. The individual's will, whether or not the will is admitted to probate or invalidated after the individual's death; or 

   c. Any form of communication made by the individual during the individual's terminal illness or injury addressed to at least two adults, at least one of whom is a disinterested witness.

2. A record signed pursuant to subsection (1)(a)(ii) of this section must:

   a. Be witnessed by at least two adults, at least one of whom is a disinterested witness, who have signed at the request of the individual; and

   b. State that it has been signed and witnessed as provided in (a) of this subsection.

3. An individual who has made a refusal may amend or revoke the refusal:

   a. In the manner provided in subsection (1) of this section for making a refusal;

   b. By subsequently making an anatomical gift pursuant to RCW 68.64.040 that is inconsistent with the refusal; or

   c. By destroying or canceling the record evidencing the refusal, or the portion of the record used to make the refusal, with the intent to revoke the refusal.

4. Except as otherwise provided in RCW 68.64.070(8), in the absence of an express, contrary indication by the individual set forth in the refusal, an individual's unrevoked refusal to make an anatomical gift of the individual's body or part bars all other persons from making an anatomical gift of the individual's body or part.

\[ [2008 c 139 § 7](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/2007-08/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/House/1637-S.SL.pdf?cite=2008%20c%20139%20§%207); \]

## 68.64.070 - Making, amending, or revoking a gift by a person other than donor—Making additional gifts.
1. Except as otherwise provided in subsection (7) of this section and subject to subsection (6) of this section, in the absence of an express, contrary indication by the donor, a person other than the donor is barred from making, amending, or revoking an anatomical gift of a donor's body or part if the donor made an anatomical gift of the donor's body or part under RCW 68.64.040 or an amendment to an anatomical gift of the donor's body or part under RCW 68.64.050.

2. A donor's revocation of an anatomical gift of the donor's body or part under RCW 68.64.050 is not a refusal and does not bar another person specified in RCW 68.64.030 or 68.64.080 from making an anatomical gift of the donor's body or part under RCW 68.64.040 or 68.64.090.

3. If a person other than the donor makes an unrevoked anatomical gift of the donor's body or part under RCW 68.64.040 or an amendment to an anatomical gift of the donor's body or part under RCW 68.64.050, another person may not make, amend, or revoke the gift of the donor's body or part under RCW 68.64.090.

4. A revocation of an anatomical gift of a donor's body or part under RCW 68.64.050 by a person other than the donor does not bar another person from making an anatomical gift of the body or part under RCW 68.64.040 or 68.64.090.

5. In the absence of an express, contrary indication by the donor or other person authorized to make an anatomical gift under RCW 68.64.030, an anatomical gift of a part is neither a refusal to give another part nor a limitation on the making of an anatomical gift of another part at a later time by the donor or another person.

6. In the absence of an express, contrary indication by the donor or other person authorized to make an anatomical gift under RCW 68.64.030, an anatomical gift of a part for one or more of the permitted purposes is not a limitation on the making of an anatomical gift of the part for any of the other purposes by the donor or any other person under RCW 68.64.040 or 68.64.090.

7. If a donor who is an unemancipated minor dies, a parent of the donor who is reasonably available may revoke or amend an anatomical gift of the donor's body or part.

8. If an unemancipated minor who signed a refusal dies, a parent of the minor who is reasonably available may revoke the minor's refusal.

\[ [2008 c 139 § 8](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/2007-08/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/House/1637-S.SL.pdf?cite=2008%20c%20139%20§%208); \]

## 68.64.080 - Persons authorized to make an anatomical gift—After donor's death.
1. Subject to subsections (2) and (3) of this section and unless barred by RCW 68.64.060 or 68.64.070, an anatomical gift of a decedent's body or part may be made by any member of the following classes of persons who is reasonably available, in the order of priority listed:

   a. An agent of the decedent at the time of death who could have made an anatomical gift under RCW 68.64.030(2) immediately before the decedent's death;

   b. The spouse, or domestic partner registered as required by state law, of the decedent;

   c. Adult children of the decedent;

   d. Parents of the decedent;

   e. Adult siblings of the decedent;

   f. Adult grandchildren of the decedent;

   g. Grandparents of the decedent;

   h. The persons who were acting as the guardians of the person of the decedent at the time of death; and

   i. Any other person having the authority under applicable law to dispose of the decedent's body.

2. If there is more than one member of a class listed in subsection (1)(a), (c), (d), (e), (f), (g), or (h) of this section entitled to make an anatomical gift, an anatomical gift may be made by a member of the class unless that member or a person to which the gift may pass under RCW 68.64.100 knows of an objection by another member of the class. If an objection is known, the gift may be made only by a majority of the members of the class who are reasonably available.

3. A person may not make an anatomical gift if, at the time of the decedent's death, a person in a prior class under subsection (1) of this section is reasonably available to make or to object to the making of an anatomical gift.

\[ [2008 c 139 § 9](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/2007-08/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/House/1637-S.SL.pdf?cite=2008%20c%20139%20§%209); \]

## 68.64.090 - Manner in which an anatomical gift may be made—After donor's death.
1. A person authorized to make an anatomical gift under RCW 68.64.080 may make an anatomical gift by a document of gift signed by the person making the gift or by that person's oral communication that is electronically recorded or is contemporaneously reduced to a record and signed by the individual receiving the oral communication.

2. Subject to subsection (3) of this section, an anatomical gift by a person authorized under RCW 68.64.080 may be amended or revoked orally or in a record by any member of a prior class who is reasonably available. If more than one member of the prior class is reasonably available, the gift made by a person authorized under RCW 68.64.080 may be:

   a. Amended only if a majority of the reasonably available members agree to the amending of the gift; or

   b. Revoked only if a majority of the reasonably available members agree to the revoking of the gift or if they are equally divided as to whether to revoke the gift.

3. A revocation under subsection (2) of this section is effective only if, before an incision has been made to remove a part from the donor's body or before transplant procedures have begun on the recipient, the procurement organization, transplant hospital, or physician or technician knows of the revocation.

\[ [2008 c 139 § 10](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/2007-08/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/House/1637-S.SL.pdf?cite=2008%20c%20139%20§%2010); \]

## 68.64.100 - Persons to whom an anatomical gift may be made.
1. An anatomical gift may be made to the following persons named in the document of gift:

   a. For research or education: A hospital; an accredited medical school, dental school, college, or university; or an organ procurement organization;

   b. Subject to subsection (2) of this section, an individual designated by the person making the anatomical gift if the individual is the recipient of the part;

   c. An eye bank or tissue bank.

2. If an anatomical gift to an individual under subsection (1)(b) of this section cannot be transplanted into the individual, the part passes in accordance with subsection (7) of this section in the absence of an express, contrary indication by the person making the anatomical gift.

3. If an anatomical gift of one or more specific parts or of all parts is made in a document of gift that does not name a person described in subsection (1) of this section but identifies the purpose for which an anatomical gift may be used, the following rules apply:

   a. If the part is an eye and the gift is for the purpose of transplantation or therapy, the gift passes to the appropriate eye bank.

   b. If the part is tissue and the gift is for the purpose of transplantation or therapy, the gift passes to the appropriate tissue bank.

   c. If the part is an organ and the gift is for the purpose of transplantation or therapy, the gift passes to the appropriate organ procurement organization as custodian of the organ.

   d. If the part is an organ, an eye, or tissue and the gift is for the purpose of research or education, the gift passes to the appropriate procurement organization.

4. For the purpose of subsection (3) of this section, if there is more than one purpose of an anatomical gift set forth in the document of gift but the purposes are not set forth in any priority, the gift must be used for transplantation or therapy, if suitable. If the gift cannot be used for transplantation or therapy, the gift may be used for research or education.

5. If an anatomical gift of one or more specific parts is made in a document of gift that does not name a person described in subsection (1) of this section and does not identify the purpose of the gift, the gift may be used only for transplantation or therapy, and the gift passes in accordance with subsection (7) of this section.

6. If a document of gift specifies only a general intent to make an anatomical gift by words such as "donor," "organ donor," or "body donor," or by a symbol or statement of similar import, the gift may be used only for transplantation or therapy, and the gift passes in accordance with subsection (7) of this section.

7. For purposes of subsections (2), (5), and (6) of this section the following rules apply:

   a. If the part is an eye, the gift passes to the appropriate eye bank.

   b. If the part is tissue, the gift passes to the appropriate tissue bank.

   c. If the part is an organ, the gift passes to the appropriate organ procurement organization as custodian of the organ.

8. An anatomical gift of an organ for transplantation or therapy, other than an anatomical gift under subsection (1)(b) of this section, passes to the organ procurement organization as custodian of the organ.

9. If an anatomical gift does not pass pursuant to subsections (1) through (8) of this section or the decedent's body or part is not used for transplantation, therapy, research, or education, custody of the body or part passes to the person under obligation to dispose of the body or part.

10. A person may not accept an anatomical gift if the person knows that the gift was not effectively made under RCW 68.64.040 or 68.64.090 or if the person knows that the decedent made a refusal under RCW 68.64.060 that was not revoked. For purposes of this subsection (10), if a person knows that an anatomical gift was made on a document of gift, the person is deemed to know of any amendment or revocation of the gift or any refusal to make an anatomical gift on the same document of gift.

11. Except as otherwise provided in subsection (1)(b) of this section, nothing in this chapter affects the allocation of organs for transplantation or therapy.

\[ [2008 c 139 § 11](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/2007-08/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/House/1637-S.SL.pdf?cite=2008%20c%20139%20§%2011); \]

## 68.64.105 - Document of gift—Validity requirements.
1. A document of gift is valid if executed in accordance with:

   a. This chapter;

   b. The laws of the state or country where it was executed; or

   c. The laws of the state or country where the person making the anatomical gift was domiciled, has a place of residence, or was a national at the time the document of gift was executed.

2. If a document of gift is valid under this section, the law of this state governs the interpretation of the document of gift.

3. A person may presume that a document of gift or amendment of an anatomical gift is valid unless that person knows that it was not validly executed or was revoked.

\[ [2008 c 139 § 19](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/2007-08/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/House/1637-S.SL.pdf?cite=2008%20c%20139%20§%2019); \]

## 68.64.110 - Document of gift or refusal—Examination and copying.
1. A document of gift need not be delivered during the donor's lifetime to be effective.

2. Upon or after an individual's death, a person in possession of a document of gift or a refusal to make an anatomical gift with respect to the individual shall allow examination and copying of the document of gift or refusal by a person authorized to make or object to the making of an anatomical gift with respect to the individual or by a person to which the gift could pass under RCW 68.64.100.

\[ [2008 c 139 § 12](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/2007-08/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/House/1637-S.SL.pdf?cite=2008%20c%20139%20§%2012); \]

## 68.64.120 - Procurement organizations—Reasonable examinations—Donee's rights—Physician removal of donated part.
1. When a hospital refers an individual at or near death to a procurement organization, the organization shall make a reasonable search of the records of the department of licensing and any donor registry that it knows exists for the geographical area in which the individual resides to ascertain whether the individual has made an anatomical gift.

2. A procurement organization must be allowed reasonable access to information in the records of the department of licensing to ascertain whether an individual at or near death is a donor.

3. When a hospital refers an individual at or near death to a procurement organization, the organization may conduct any reasonable examination necessary to ensure the medical suitability of a part that is or could be the subject of an anatomical gift for transplantation, therapy, research, or education from a donor or a prospective donor. During the examination period, measures necessary to ensure the medical suitability of the part may not be withdrawn unless the hospital or procurement organization knows that the individual expressed a contrary intent.

4. Unless prohibited by law other than this chapter, at any time after a donor's death, the person to which a part passes under RCW 68.64.100 may conduct any reasonable examination necessary to ensure the medical suitability of the body or part for its intended purpose.

5. Unless prohibited by law other than this chapter, an examination under subsection (3) or (4) of this section may include an examination of all medical records of the donor or prospective donor.

6. Upon the death of a minor who was a donor or had signed a refusal, unless a procurement organization knows the minor is emancipated, the procurement organization shall conduct a reasonable search for the parents of the minor and provide the parents with an opportunity to revoke or amend the anatomical gift or revoke the refusal.

7. Upon referral by a hospital under subsection (1) of this section, a procurement organization shall make a reasonable search for any person listed in RCW 68.64.080 having priority to make an anatomical gift on behalf of a prospective donor. If a procurement organization receives information that an anatomical gift to any other person was made, amended, or revoked, it shall promptly advise the other person of all relevant information.

8. Subject to RCW 68.64.100(9), 68.64.190, and 68.64.901, the rights of the person to which a part passes under RCW 68.64.100 are superior to the rights of all others with respect to the part. The person may accept or reject an anatomical gift in whole or in part. Subject to the terms of the document of gift and this chapter, a person that accepts an anatomical gift of an entire body may allow embalming, burial, alkaline hydrolysis, natural organic reduction, and use of remains in a funeral service. If the gift is of a part, the person to which the part passes under RCW 68.64.100, upon the death of the donor and before embalming or final disposition, must cause the part to be removed without unnecessary mutilation.

9. Neither the physician who attends the decedent at death nor the physician who determines the time of the decedent's death may participate in the procedures for removing or transplanting a part from the decedent.

10. A physician or technician may remove a donated part from the body of a donor that the physician or technician is qualified to remove.

\[ [2019 c 432 § 28](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/2019-20/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/Senate/5001-S.SL.pdf?cite=2019%20c%20432%20§%2028); [2008 c 139 § 13](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/2007-08/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/House/1637-S.SL.pdf?cite=2008%20c%20139%20§%2013); \]

## 68.64.130 - Nonnative English speakers—Interpreter services and translations.
When English is not the first language of the person or persons making, amending, revoking, or refusing anatomical gifts as defined in chapter 139, Laws of 2008, organ procurement organizations are responsible for providing, at no cost, appropriate interpreter services or translations to such persons for the purpose of making such decisions.

\[ [2008 c 139 § 14](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/2007-08/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/House/1637-S.SL.pdf?cite=2008%20c%20139%20§%2014); \]

## 68.64.140 - Hospitals—Agreements or affiliations with procurement organizations required.
Each hospital in this state shall enter into agreements or affiliations with procurement organizations for coordination of procurement and use of anatomical gifts.

\[ [2008 c 139 § 15](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/2007-08/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/House/1637-S.SL.pdf?cite=2008%20c%20139%20§%2015); \]

## 68.64.150 - Illegal purchases or sales—Felony.
1. Except as otherwise provided in subsection (2) of this section, a person who, for valuable consideration, knowingly purchases or sells a part for transplantation or therapy if removal of a part from an individual is intended to occur after the individual's death is guilty of a class C felony under RCW 9A.20.010.

2. A person may charge a reasonable amount for the removal, processing, preservation, quality control, storage, transportation, implantation, or disposal of a part.

\[ [2008 c 139 § 16](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/2007-08/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/House/1637-S.SL.pdf?cite=2008%20c%20139%20§%2016); \]

## 68.64.160 - Illegal financial gain—Altering a document, amendment, or revocation of gift—Felony.
A person who, in order to obtain financial gain, intentionally falsifies, forges, conceals, defaces, or obliterates a document of gift, an amendment or revocation of a document of gift, or a refusal is guilty of a class C felony under RCW 9A.20.010.

\[ [2008 c 139 § 17](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/2007-08/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/House/1637-S.SL.pdf?cite=2008%20c%20139%20§%2017); \]

## 68.64.170 - Liability.
1. A person who acts in accordance with this chapter or with the applicable anatomical gift law of another state, or attempts in good faith to do so, is not liable for the act in a civil action, criminal prosecution, or administrative proceeding.

2. Neither the person making an anatomical gift nor the donor's estate is liable for any injury or damage that results from the making or use of the gift.

3. In determining whether an anatomical gift has been made, amended, or revoked under this chapter, a person may rely upon representations of an individual listed in RCW 68.64.080(1) (b) through (g) relating to the individual's relationship to the donor or prospective donor unless the person knows that the representation is untrue.

\[ [2008 c 139 § 18](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/2007-08/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/House/1637-S.SL.pdf?cite=2008%20c%20139%20§%2018); \]

## 68.64.180 - Declarations or advance health care directives—Conflicts with medical suitability measures.
1. The definitions in this subsection apply throughout this section unless the context clearly requires otherwise.

   a. "Advance health care directive" means a power of attorney for health care or a "directive" as defined in RCW 70.122.020. 

   b. "Declaration" means a record signed by a prospective donor specifying the circumstances under which a life support system may be withheld or withdrawn from the prospective donor.

   c. "Health care decision" means any decision made regarding the health care of the prospective donor.

2. If a prospective donor has a declaration or advance health care directive, and the terms of the declaration or directive and the express or implied terms of a potential anatomical gift are in conflict with regard to the administration of measures necessary to ensure the medical suitability of a part for transplantation or therapy, the prospective donor's attending physician and the prospective donor shall confer to resolve the conflict. If the prospective donor is incapable of resolving the conflict, an agent acting under the prospective donor's declaration or directive, or, if none or the agent is not reasonably available, another person authorized by law other than this chapter to make health care decisions on behalf of the prospective donor, shall act for the donor to resolve the conflict. The conflict must be resolved as expeditiously as possible. Information relevant to the resolution of the conflict may be obtained from the appropriate procurement organization and any other person authorized to make an anatomical gift for the prospective donor under RCW 68.64.080. Before resolution of the conflict, measures necessary to ensure the medical suitability of the part may not be withheld or withdrawn from the prospective donor if withholding or withdrawing the measures is not contraindicated by appropriate end-of-life care.

\[ [2008 c 139 § 20](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/2007-08/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/House/1637-S.SL.pdf?cite=2008%20c%20139%20§%2020); \]

## 68.64.190 - Coroner or medical examiner—Duties.
1. [Empty]

   a. A coroner or medical examiner shall cooperate with procurement organizations, to the extent that such cooperation does not prevent, hinder, or impede the timely investigation of death, to facilitate the opportunity to recover anatomical gifts for the purpose of transplantation or therapy. However, a coroner or medical examiner may limit the number of procurement organizations with which he or she cooperates.

   b. The coroner or medical examiner may release the initial investigative information to the tissue or organ procurement organization for the purpose of determining the suitability of the potential donor by those organizations. The information released for this purpose shall remain confidential. The coroner or medical examiner is not liable for any release of confidential information by the procurement organization.

2. [Empty]

   a. Procurement organizations shall cooperate with the coroner or medical examiner to ensure the preservation of and timely transfer to the coroner or medical examiner any physical or biological evidence from a prospective donor that the procurement organization may have contact with or access to that is required by the coroner or medical examiner for the investigation of death.

   b. If the coroner or medical examiner or a designee releases a part for donation under subsection (4) of this section, the procurement organization, upon request, shall cause the physician or technician who removes the part to provide the coroner or medical examiner with a record describing the condition of the part, biopsies, residual tissue, photographs, and any other information and observations requested by the coroner or medical examiner that would assist in the investigation of death.

3. A part may not be removed from the body of a decedent under the jurisdiction of a coroner or medical examiner for transplantation, therapy, research, or education unless the part is the subject of an anatomical gift, and has been released by the coroner or medical examiner. The body of a decedent under the jurisdiction of the coroner or medical examiner may not be delivered to a person for research or education unless the body is the subject of an anatomical gift. This subsection does not preclude a coroner or medical examiner from performing the medicolegal investigation upon the body or relevant parts of a decedent under the jurisdiction of the coroner or medical examiner.

4. If an anatomical gift of a part from the decedent under the jurisdiction of the coroner or medical examiner has been or might be made, but the coroner or medical examiner initially believes that the recovery of the part could interfere with the postmortem investigation into the decedent's cause or manner of death, the collection of evidence, or the description, documentation, or interpretation of injuries on the body, the coroner or medical examiner may consult with the procurement organization or physician or technician designated by the procurement organization about the proposed recovery. After consultation, the coroner or medical examiner may release the part for recovery.

\[ [2008 c 139 § 21](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/2007-08/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/House/1637-S.SL.pdf?cite=2008%20c%20139%20§%2021); \]

## 68.64.200 - Organ and tissue donor registry.
1. The department of licensing shall electronically transfer all information that appears on the front of a driver's license or identicard including the name, gender, date of birth, and most recent address of any person who obtains a driver's license or identicard and volunteers to donate organs or tissue upon death to any Washington state organ procurement organization that intends to establish a statewide organ and tissue donor registry as provided under subsection (2) of this section. All subsequent electronic transfers of donor information shall be at no charge to this Washington state organ procurement organization.

2. Information obtained by a Washington state organ procurement organization under subsection (1) of this section shall be used for the purpose of establishing a statewide organ and tissue donor registry accessible to in-state recognized cadaveric organ and cadaveric tissue agencies for the recovery or placement of organs and tissue and to procurement agencies in another state when a Washington state resident is a donor of an anatomical gift and is not located in this state at the time of death or immediately before the death of the donor. Any registry created using information acquired under subsection (1) of this section must include all residents of Washington state regardless of their residence within the service area designated by the federal government.

3. No organ or tissue donation organization may obtain information from the organ and tissue donor registry for the purposes of fund-raising. Organ and tissue donor registry information may not be further disseminated unless authorized in this section or by federal law. Dissemination of organ and tissue donor registry information may be made by a Washington state organ procurement organization to another Washington state organ procurement organization, a recognized in-state procurement agency for other tissue recovery, or an out-of-state federally designated organ procurement organization that has been designated by the United States department of health and human services to serve an area outside Washington.

4. A Washington state organ procurement organization may acquire donor information from sources other than the department of licensing.

5. All reasonable costs associated with the creation of an organ and tissue donor registry shall be paid by the Washington state organ procurement organization that has requested the information. The reasonable costs associated with the initial installation and setup for electronic transfer of the donor information at the department of licensing shall be paid by the Washington state organ procurement organization that requested the information.

6. An individual does not need to participate in the organ and tissue donor registry to be a donor of organs or tissue. The registry is to facilitate organ and tissue donations and not inhibit persons from being donors upon death.

\[ [2003 c 94 § 3](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/2003-04/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/Senate/5509-S.SL.pdf?cite=2003%20c%2094%20§%203); \]

## 68.64.210 - Organ and tissue donation awareness account.
1. The organ and tissue donation awareness account is created in the custody of the state treasurer. All receipts from donations made under RCW 46.16A.090(2), and other contributions and appropriations specifically made for the purposes of organ and tissue donor awareness, shall be deposited into the account. Except as provided in subsection (2) of this section, expenditures from the account may be authorized by the director of the department of licensing or the director's designee and do not require an appropriation.

2. The department of licensing shall submit a funding request to the legislature covering the reasonable costs associated with the ongoing maintenance associated with the electronic transfer of the donor information to the organ and tissue donor registry and the donation program established in RCW 46.16A.090(2). The legislature shall appropriate to the department of licensing an amount it deems reasonable from the organ and tissue donation awareness account to the department of licensing for these purposes.

3. At least quarterly, the department of licensing shall transmit any remaining moneys in the organ and tissue donation awareness account to the foundation established in RCW 46.16A.090(2) for the costs associated with educating the public about the organ and tissue donor registry and related organ and tissue donation education programs.

4. Funding for donation awareness programs must be proportional across the state regardless of which Washington state organ procurement organization may be designated by the United States department of health and human services to serve a particular geographic area. No funds from the account may be used to fund activities outside Washington state.

\[ [2010 c 161 § 1157](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/2009-10/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/Senate/6379.SL.pdf?cite=2010%20c%20161%20§%201157); [2003 c 94 § 7](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/2003-04/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/Senate/5509-S.SL.pdf?cite=2003%20c%2094%20§%207); \]

## 68.64.900 - Short title.
This chapter may be cited as the revised uniform anatomical gift act.

\[ [2008 c 139 § 1](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/2007-08/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/House/1637-S.SL.pdf?cite=2008%20c%20139%20§%201); \]

## 68.64.901 - Applicable state laws.
This chapter is subject to the laws of this state governing the jurisdiction of the coroner or medical examiner.

\[ [2008 c 139 § 22](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/2007-08/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/House/1637-S.SL.pdf?cite=2008%20c%20139%20§%2022); \]

## 68.64.902 - Uniformity of application and construction—2008 c 139.
In applying and construing this uniform act, consideration must be given to the need to promote uniformity of the law with respect to its subject matter among states that enact it.

\[ [2008 c 139 § 23](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/2007-08/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/House/1637-S.SL.pdf?cite=2008%20c%20139%20§%2023); \]

## 68.64.903 - Supersedes, in part, the federal electronic signatures in global and national commerce act.
This chapter modifies, limits, and supersedes the federal electronic signatures in global and national commerce act (15 U.S.C. Sec. 7001 et seq.) with respect to electronic signatures and anatomical gifts, but does not modify, limit, or supersede section 101(a) of that act (15 U.S.C. Sec. 7001), or authorize electronic delivery of any of the notices described in section 103(b) of that act (15 U.S.C. Sec. 7003(b)).

\[ [2008 c 139 § 24](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/2007-08/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/House/1637-S.SL.pdf?cite=2008%20c%20139%20§%2024); \]

