# 24.50 - Washington manufacturing services.
* [24.50.005 - Findings—Intent.](#2450005---findingsintent)
* [24.50.010 - Washington manufacturing services—Organization—Mission—Board of directors—Powers—Duties.](#2450010---washington-manufacturing-servicesorganizationmissionboard-of-directorspowersduties)
## 24.50.005 - Findings—Intent.
1. The legislature finds that:

   a. To perform in the emerging global marketplace, Washington manufacturers must master new technologies, production processes, and methods of work organization;

   b. Only through modernization can Washington manufacturers both compete successfully in the market of the future and pay good wages;

   c. Most small and midsize manufacturers cannot easily access the technical assistance and skills training needed to make them globally competitive;

   d. To be effective, any program to improve the capability of Washington small and midsize manufacturers must reflect the specific needs and capabilities of those firms.

2. It is the intent of the legislature that the state increase its support for delivery of modernization services to small and midsize manufacturers and leverage federal and private resources devoted to such efforts. It is the further intent of the legislature that the state facilitate the delivery of modernization services and:

   a. Encourage small and midsize firms to aggregate their demand for training and other modernization services, thus driving down the cost to the individual firm and securing more effective services; and

   b. Encourage large firms to support training consortia among their suppliers and validate the importance of high performance work organization and workplace learning as desirable supplier practices.

\[ [2006 c 34 § 1](https://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/2005-06/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/House/2726-S.SL.pdf?cite=2006%20c%2034%20§%201); \]

## 24.50.010 - Washington manufacturing services—Organization—Mission—Board of directors—Powers—Duties.
1. Washington manufacturing services is organized as a private, nonprofit corporation in accordance with chapter 24.03A RCW and this section. The mission of the corporation is to operate a modernization extension system, coordinate a network of public and private modernization resources, and stimulate the competitiveness of small and midsize manufacturers in Washington.

2. The corporation must be governed by a board of directors. A majority of the board of directors shall be representatives of small and medium-sized manufacturing firms and industry associations, networks, or consortia. The board must also include at least one member representing labor unions or labor councils and, as ex officio members, the director of the department of commerce, the executive director of the state board for community and technical colleges, and the director of the workforce training and education coordinating board, or their respective designees.

3. The corporation may be known as impact Washington and may:

   a. Charge fees for services, make and execute contracts with any individual, corporation, association, public agency, or any other entity, and employ all other legal instruments necessary or convenient for the performance of its duties and the exercise of its powers and functions under this chapter; and

   b. Receive funds from federal, state, or local governments, private businesses, foundations, or any other source for purposes consistent with this chapter.

4. The corporation must:

   a. Develop policies, plans, and programs to assist in the modernization of businesses in targeted sectors of Washington's economy and coordinate the delivery of modernization services;

   b. Provide information about the advantages of modernization and the modernization services available in the state to federal, state, and local economic development officials, state colleges and universities, and private providers;

   c. Collaborate with the Washington quality initiative in the development of manufacturing quality standards and quality certification programs;

   d. Collaborate with industry sector and cluster associations to inform import-impacted manufacturers about federal trade adjustment assistance funding;

   e. Serve as an information clearinghouse and provide access for users to the federal manufacturing extension partnership national research and information system; and

   f. Provide, either directly or through contracts, assistance to industry or cluster associations, networks, or consortia, that would be of value to their member firms in:

      i. Adopting advanced business management practices such as strategic planning and total quality management;

      ii. Developing mechanisms for interfirm collaboration and cooperation;

      iii. Appraising, purchasing, installing, and effectively using equipment, technologies, and processes that improve the quality of goods and services and the productivity of the firm;

      iv. Improving human resource systems and workforce training in a manner that moves firms toward flexible, high-performance work organizations;

      v. Developing new products;

      vi. Conducting market research, analysis, and development of new sales channels and export markets;

      vii. Improving processes to enhance environmental, health, and safety compliance; and

      viii. Improving credit, capital management, and business finance skills.

5. Between thirty-five and sixty-five percent of the funds received by the corporation from the state must be used by the corporation for carrying out the duties under subsection (4)(f) of this section, consistent with the intent of RCW 24.50.005(2).

\[ [2021 c 176 § 5209](https://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/2021-22/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/Senate/5034-S.SL.pdf?cite=2021%20c%20176%20§%205209); [2011 c 310 § 1](https://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/2011-12/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/Senate/5731.SL.pdf?cite=2011%20c%20310%20§%201); [2006 c 34 § 2](https://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/2005-06/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/House/2726-S.SL.pdf?cite=2006%20c%2034%20§%202); \]

