# 15.21 - Washington fresh fruit sales limitation act.
* [15.21.010 - Declaration of purpose.](#1521010---declaration-of-purpose)
* [15.21.020 - Unlawful practices.](#1521020---unlawful-practices)
* [15.21.030 - Cost.](#1521030---cost)
* [15.21.040 - Combination sales.](#1521040---combination-sales)
* [15.21.050 - Injunction.](#1521050---injunction)
* [15.21.060 - Penalties.](#1521060---penalties)
* [15.21.070 - Exempt sales.](#1521070---exempt-sales)
* [15.21.900 - Chapter cumulative.](#1521900---chapter-cumulative)
* [15.21.910 - Short title.](#1521910---short-title)
## 15.21.010 - Declaration of purpose.
Limitations or restrictions placed on the buyer by the seller offering fresh fruit for sale as to the amount that such prospective buyer may purchase of the total amount of such fresh fruit owned, possessed or controlled by the seller, may lead to or cause confusion, deceptive trade practices, and interfere with the orderly marketing of fresh fruit necessary for the public health and welfare, and is hereby declared to be a business affected with the public interest. The provisions of this chapter are enacted in the exercise of the police powers of the state for the purpose of protecting the general health and welfare of the people of this state.

\[ [1965 c 61 § 1](http://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1965c61.pdf?cite=1965%20c%2061%20§%201); \]

## 15.21.020 - Unlawful practices.
It shall be unlawful to cause a limitation to be placed on the amount of fresh fruit that a purchaser may buy at retail or wholesale when such fresh fruit is offered for sale, through any media, below cost to the seller. The foregoing shall apply to all such fresh fruit offered for sale below cost and owned, possessed or controlled by such seller.

\[ [1965 c 61 § 2](http://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1965c61.pdf?cite=1965%20c%2061%20§%202); \]

## 15.21.030 - Cost.
Cost for the purpose of this chapter, shall be that price paid for fresh fruit by the seller or the actual replacement cost for such fresh fruit: PROVIDED, That the delivered invoice price to such seller shall be prima facie evidence of the price paid for such fresh fruit by the seller.

\[ [1965 c 61 § 3](http://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1965c61.pdf?cite=1965%20c%2061%20§%203); \]

## 15.21.040 - Combination sales.
When one or more items are offered for sale or sold with one or more items at a combined price, or offered individually or as a package or a unit to be given with the sale of one or more items, each and all such items shall for the purpose of this chapter be deemed to be offered for sale, and as to such transaction the cost basis shall be the combined cost basis of all such items as determined pursuant to RCW 15.21.030.

\[ [1965 c 61 § 4](http://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1965c61.pdf?cite=1965%20c%2061%20§%204); \]

## 15.21.050 - Injunction.
Any person, prosecuting attorney, or the attorney general may bring an action to enjoin the violation or threatened violation of the provisions of this chapter in the superior court in the county where such violation occurs or is about to occur, notwithstanding the existence of any other remedies at law.

\[ [1965 c 61 § 5](http://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1965c61.pdf?cite=1965%20c%2061%20§%205); \]

## 15.21.060 - Penalties.
1. Except as provided in subsection (2) of this section, any person violating the provisions of this chapter is guilty of a misdemeanor.

2. A second or subsequent violation is a gross misdemeanor. Any offense committed more than five years after a previous conviction shall be considered a first offense.

\[ [2003 c 53 § 103](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/2003-04/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/Senate/5758.SL.pdf?cite=2003%20c%2053%20§%20103); [1965 c 61 § 6](http://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1965c61.pdf?cite=1965%20c%2061%20§%206); \]

## 15.21.070 - Exempt sales.
The provisions of this chapter shall not apply to the following sales at retail or sales at wholesale:

1. When fresh fruit is sold for charitable purposes or to relief agencies;

2. When fresh fruit is sold on contract to departments of the government or governmental institutions;

3. When fresh fruit is sold by any officer acting under the order or direction of any court.

\[ [1965 c 61 § 7](http://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1965c61.pdf?cite=1965%20c%2061%20§%207); \]

## 15.21.900 - Chapter cumulative.
The provisions of this chapter shall be cumulative and nonexclusive and shall not affect any other remedy.

\[ [1965 c 61 § 8](http://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1965c61.pdf?cite=1965%20c%2061%20§%208); \]

## 15.21.910 - Short title.
This chapter may be cited as the Washington fresh fruit sales limitation act.

\[ [1965 c 61 § 9](http://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1965c61.pdf?cite=1965%20c%2061%20§%209); \]

