# 15.61 - Ladybugs and other beneficial insects.
* [15.61.010 - Administrative declaration—Regulation of commercial movement.](#1561010---administrative-declarationregulation-of-commercial-movement)
* [15.61.020 - Intergovernmental cooperation.](#1561020---intergovernmental-cooperation)
* [15.61.030 - Injunctions.](#1561030---injunctions)
* [15.61.040 - Nonapplicability to honey bees and insects used for research.](#1561040---nonapplicability-to-honey-bees-and-insects-used-for-research)
* [15.61.050 - Violations—Penalty.](#1561050---violationspenalty)
## 15.61.010 - Administrative declaration—Regulation of commercial movement.
The director of agriculture in order to protect the production of native and/or domestic plants or their products in this state, may declare ladybugs or any other insects to be beneficial insects and necessary to maintain a beneficial biological balance over insects which are detrimental to such native and/or domestic plants or their products. Such declaration shall be made only after a hearing as prescribed in the administrative procedure act, chapter 34.05 RCW.

Upon declaring ladybugs or other insects to be beneficial insects the director of agriculture may regulate or prohibit the commercial movement of such beneficial insects from this state.

\[ [1963 c 232 § 10](http://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1963c232.pdf?cite=1963%20c%20232%20§%2010); \]

## 15.61.020 - Intergovernmental cooperation.
The director of agriculture may cooperate and enter into agreements with governmental agencies, other states, and agencies of the federal government to carry out the purposes and provisions of this chapter or rules adopted hereunder.

\[ [1963 c 232 § 11](http://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1963c232.pdf?cite=1963%20c%20232%20§%2011); \]

## 15.61.030 - Injunctions.
The director of agriculture may bring an action to enjoin the violation of any provision of this chapter or rule adopted pursuant to said sections in the county where such violation has occurred, notwithstanding the existence of any other remedies at law.

\[ [1963 c 232 § 12](http://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1963c232.pdf?cite=1963%20c%20232%20§%2012); \]

## 15.61.040 - Nonapplicability to honey bees and insects used for research.
The provisions of this chapter shall not apply to honey bees or to those beneficial insects used for research purposes.

\[ [1963 c 232 § 13](http://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1963c232.pdf?cite=1963%20c%20232%20§%2013); \]

## 15.61.050 - Violations—Penalty.
1. Except as provided in subsection (2) of this section, any person violating the provisions of this chapter or rules adopted hereunder is guilty of a misdemeanor.

2. A second or subsequent violation is a gross misdemeanor. Any offense committed more than five years after a previous conviction shall be considered a first offense.

\[ [2003 c 53 § 108](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/2003-04/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/Senate/5758.SL.pdf?cite=2003%20c%2053%20§%20108); [1963 c 232 § 14](http://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1963c232.pdf?cite=1963%20c%20232%20§%2014); \]

