# 15.85 - Aquaculture marketing.
* [15.85.010 - Legislative declaration.](#1585010---legislative-declaration)
* [15.85.020 - Definitions.](#1585020---definitions)
* [15.85.030 - Department principal agency for aquaculture marketing support.](#1585030---department-principal-agency-for-aquaculture-marketing-support)
* [15.85.040 - Rules.](#1585040---rules)
* [15.85.050 - Program to assist marketing and promotion of aquaculture products.](#1585050---program-to-assist-marketing-and-promotion-of-aquaculture-products)
* [15.85.060 - Private sector cultured aquatic products—Identification—Rules.](#1585060---private-sector-cultured-aquatic-productsidentificationrules)
## 15.85.010 - Legislative declaration.
The legislature declares that aquatic farming provides a consistent source of quality food, offers opportunities of new jobs, increased farm income stability, and improves balance of trade.

The legislature finds that many areas of the state of Washington are scientifically and biologically suitable for aquaculture development, and therefore the legislature encourages promotion of aquacultural activities, programs, and development with the same status as other agricultural activities, programs, and development within the state.

The legislature finds that aquaculture should be considered a branch of the agricultural industry of the state for purposes of any laws that apply to or provide for the advancement, benefit, or protection of the agriculture industry within the state.

The legislature further finds that in order to ensure the maximum yield and quality of cultured aquatic products, the department of fish and wildlife should provide diagnostic services that are workable and proven remedies to aquaculture disease problems.

It is therefore the policy of this state to encourage the development and expansion of aquaculture within the state. It is also the policy of this state to protect wildstock fisheries by providing an effective disease inspection and control program and prohibiting the release of salmon or steelhead trout by the private sector into the public waters of the state and the subsequent recapture of such species as in the practice commonly known as ocean ranching.

\[ [1994 c 264 § 4](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/1993-94/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/House/2590.SL.pdf?cite=1994%20c%20264%20§%204); [1985 c 457 § 1](http://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1985c457.pdf?cite=1985%20c%20457%20§%201); \]

## 15.85.020 - Definitions.
Unless the context clearly requires otherwise, the definitions in this section apply throughout this chapter.

1. "Aquaculture" means the process of growing, farming, or cultivating private sector cultured aquatic products in marine or fresh waters and includes management by an aquatic farmer.

2. "Aquatic farmer" is a private sector person who commercially farms and manages the cultivating of private sector cultured aquatic products on the person's own land or on land in which the person has a present right of possession.

3. "Private sector cultured aquatic products" are native, nonnative, or hybrids of marine or freshwater plants and animals that are propagated, farmed, or cultivated on aquatic farms under the supervision and management of a private sector aquatic farmer or that are naturally set on aquatic farms which at the time of setting are under the active supervision and management of a private sector aquatic farmer. When produced under such supervision and management, private sector cultured aquatic products include, but are not limited to, the following plants and animals:

Scientific NameCommon NameEnteromorphagreen noriMonostromaawo-noriUlvasea lettuceLaminariakonbuNereocystisbull kelpPorphyranoriIridaea HaliotisabaloneZhlamyspink scallopHinnitesrock scallopTatinopectenJapanese or weathervane scallopProtothacanative littleneck clamTapesmanila clamSaxidomusbutter clamMytilusmusselsCrassostreaPacific oystersOstreaOlympia and European oystersPacifasticuscrayfishMacrobrachiumfreshwater prawnSalmo and Salvelinustrout, char, and Atlantic salmonOncorhynchussalmonIctaluruscatfishCyprinuscarpAcipenseridaeSturgeon

Scientific Name

Common Name

Enteromorpha

green nori

Monostroma

awo-nori

Ulva

sea lettuce

Laminaria

konbu

Nereocystis

bull kelp

Porphyra

nori

Iridaea

 

Haliotis

abalone

Zhlamys

pink scallop

Hinnites

rock scallop

Tatinopecten

Japanese or weathervane scallop

Protothaca

native littleneck clam

Tapes

manila clam

Saxidomus

butter clam

Mytilus

mussels

Crassostrea

Pacific oysters

Ostrea

Olympia and European oysters

Pacifasticus

crayfish

Macrobrachium

freshwater prawn

Salmo and Salvelinus

trout, char, and Atlantic salmon

Oncorhynchus

salmon

Ictalurus

catfish

Cyprinus

carp

Acipenseridae

Sturgeon

Private sector cultured aquatic products do not include herring spawn on kelp and other products harvested under a herring spawn on kelp permit issued in accordance with RCW 77.70.210.

4. "Department" means the department of agriculture.

5. "Director" means the director of agriculture.

\[ [2003 c 39 § 7](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/2003-04/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/Senate/5172.SL.pdf?cite=2003%20c%2039%20§%207); [1989 c 176 § 3](http://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1989c176.pdf?cite=1989%20c%20176%20§%203); [1985 c 457 § 2](http://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1985c457.pdf?cite=1985%20c%20457%20§%202); \]

## 15.85.030 - Department principal agency for aquaculture marketing support.
The department is the principal state agency for providing state marketing support services for the private sector aquaculture industry.

\[ [1985 c 457 § 3](http://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1985c457.pdf?cite=1985%20c%20457%20§%203); \]

## 15.85.040 - Rules.
The department shall adopt rules under chapter 34.05 RCW to implement this chapter.

\[ [1985 c 457 § 7](http://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1985c457.pdf?cite=1985%20c%20457%20§%207); \]

## 15.85.050 - Program to assist marketing and promotion of aquaculture products.
The department shall exercise its authorities, including those provided by chapters 15.64, 15.65, 15.66, and 43.23 RCW, to develop a program for assisting the state's aquaculture industry to market and promote the use of its products.

\[ [1989 c 11 § 2](http://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1989c11.pdf?cite=1989%20c%2011%20§%202); [1985 c 457 § 4](http://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1985c457.pdf?cite=1985%20c%20457%20§%204); \]

## 15.85.060 - Private sector cultured aquatic products—Identification—Rules.
The director shall establish identification requirements for private sector cultured aquatic products to the extent that identifying the source and quantity of the products is necessary to permit the department of fish and wildlife to administer and enforce Title 77 RCW effectively. The rules shall apply only to those private sector cultured aquatic products the transportation, sale, processing, or other possession of which would otherwise be required to be licensed under Title 77 RCW if they were not cultivated by aquatic farmers. The rules shall apply to the transportation or possession of such products on land other than aquatic lands and may require that they be: (1) Placed in labeled containers or accompanied by bills of lading or sale or similar documents identifying the name and address of the producer of the products and the quantity of the products governed by the documents; or (2) both labeled and accompanied by such documents.

The director shall consult with the director of fish and wildlife to ensure that such rules enable the department of fish and wildlife to enforce the programs administered under those titles. If rules adopted under chapter 69.30 RCW satisfy the identification required under this section for shellfish, the director shall not establish different shellfish identification requirements under this section.

\[ [2003 c 39 § 8](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/2003-04/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/Senate/5172.SL.pdf?cite=2003%20c%2039%20§%208); [1994 c 264 § 5](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/1993-94/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/House/2590.SL.pdf?cite=1994%20c%20264%20§%205); [1988 c 36 § 6](http://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1988c36.pdf?cite=1988%20c%2036%20§%206); [1985 c 457 § 5](http://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1985c457.pdf?cite=1985%20c%20457%20§%205); \]

