# 30A.22 - Financial institution individual account deposit act.
* [30A.22.010 - Short title.](#30a22010---short-title)
* [30A.22.020 - Purposes.](#30a22020---purposes)
* [30A.22.030 - Construction.](#30a22030---construction)
* [30A.22.040 - Definitions.](#30a22040---definitions)
* [30A.22.041 - Definitions.](#30a22041---definitions)
* [30A.22.050 - Types of accounts which financial institution may establish.](#30a22050---types-of-accounts-which-financial-institution-may-establish)
* [30A.22.060 - Requirements of contract of deposit.](#30a22060---requirements-of-contract-of-deposit)
* [30A.22.070 - Accounts of minors and incompetents.](#30a22070---accounts-of-minors-and-incompetents)
* [30A.22.080 - Accounts of married persons.](#30a22080---accounts-of-married-persons)
* [30A.22.090 - Ownership of funds during lifetime of depositor.](#30a22090---ownership-of-funds-during-lifetime-of-depositor)
* [30A.22.100 - Ownership of funds after death of a depositor.](#30a22100---ownership-of-funds-after-death-of-a-depositor)
* [30A.22.110 - Controversies between owners.](#30a22110---controversies-between-owners)
* [30A.22.120 - Right to rely on form of account—Discharge of financial institutions.](#30a22120---right-to-rely-on-form-of-accountdischarge-of-financial-institutions)
* [30A.22.130 - Rights as between individuals preserved.](#30a22130---rights-as-between-individuals-preserved)
* [30A.22.140 - Payment of funds to a depositor.](#30a22140---payment-of-funds-to-a-depositor)
* [30A.22.150 - Payment to minors and incompetents.](#30a22150---payment-to-minors-and-incompetents)
* [30A.22.160 - Payment to trust and P.O.D. account beneficiaries.](#30a22160---payment-to-trust-and-pod-account-beneficiaries)
* [30A.22.170 - Payment to agents of depositors.](#30a22170---payment-to-agents-of-depositors)
* [30A.22.180 - Payment to personal representatives.](#30a22180---payment-to-personal-representatives)
* [30A.22.190 - Payment to heirs and creditors of a deceased depositor.](#30a22190---payment-to-heirs-and-creditors-of-a-deceased-depositor)
* [30A.22.200 - Payment to foreign personal representative—Release of financial institution.](#30a22200---payment-to-foreign-personal-representativerelease-of-financial-institution)
* [30A.22.210 - Authority to withhold payment—Vulnerable adults.](#30a22210---authority-to-withhold-paymentvulnerable-adults)
* [30A.22.220 - Adverse claim bond.](#30a22220---adverse-claim-bond)
* [30A.22.230 - Authority to charge a customer for furnishing items or copies of items.](#30a22230---authority-to-charge-a-customer-for-furnishing-items-or-copies-of-items)
* [30A.22.240 - Records—Disclosure—Requests by law enforcement—Fees.](#30a22240---recordsdisclosurerequests-by-law-enforcementfees)
* [30A.22.245 - Records—Admission as evidence—Certificate.](#30a22245---recordsadmission-as-evidencecertificate)
* [30A.22.250 - No duty to request information.](#30a22250---no-duty-to-request-information)
* [30A.22.260 - Promotional contests of chance—Director's authority.](#30a22260---promotional-contests-of-chancedirectors-authority)
* [30A.22.900 - Effective date—1981 c 192.](#30a22900---effective-date1981-c-192)
* [30A.22.902 - Construction—Chapter applicable to state registered domestic partnerships—2009 c 521.](#30a22902---constructionchapter-applicable-to-state-registered-domestic-partnerships2009-c-521)
## 30A.22.010 - Short title.
This chapter shall be known and may be cited as the financial institution individual account deposit act.

\[ [1981 c 192 § 1](http://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1981c192.pdf?cite=1981%20c%20192%20§%201); \]

## 30A.22.020 - Purposes.
The purposes of this chapter are:

1. To provide a consistent law applicable to all financial institutions authorized to accept deposits from individuals with respect to payments by the institutions to individuals claiming rights to the deposited funds; and

2. To qualify and simplify the law concerning the respective ownership interests of individuals to funds held on deposit by financial institutions, both as to the relationship between the individual depositors and beneficiaries of an account, and to the financial institution-depositor-beneficiary relationships; and

3. To simplify and make consistent the law pertaining to payments by financial institutions of deposited funds both before and after the death of a depositor or depositors, including provisions for the validity and effect of certain nontestamentary transfers of deposits upon the death of one or more depositors.

\[ [1981 c 192 § 2](http://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1981c192.pdf?cite=1981%20c%20192%20§%202); \]

## 30A.22.030 - Construction.
When construing sections and provisions of this chapter, the sections and provisions shall:

1. Be liberally construed and applied to promote the purposes of the chapter; and

2. Be considered part of a general act which is intended as unified coverage of the subject matter, and no part of the chapter shall be deemed impliedly repealed by subsequent legislation if such construction can be reasonably avoided; and

3. Not be held invalid because of the invalidity of other sections or provisions of the chapter as long as the section or provision in question can be given effect without regard to the invalid section or provision, and to this end the sections and provisions of this chapter are declared to be severable; and

4. Not be construed by reference to section or subsection headings as used in the chapter since these do not constitute any part of the law; and

5. Not be deemed to alter the community or separate property nature of any funds held on deposit by a financial institution or any individual's community or separate property rights thereto, and a depositor's community and/or separate property rights to funds on deposit shall not be affected by the form of the account; and

6. Not be construed as authorizing or extending the authority of any financial institution to accept deposits or to permit a financial institution to accept deposits from such persons or entities or upon such terms as would contravene any other applicable federal or state law.

\[ [1981 c 192 § 3](http://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1981c192.pdf?cite=1981%20c%20192%20§%203); \]

## 30A.22.040 - Definitions.
Unless the context of this chapter otherwise requires, the terms contained in this section have the meanings indicated.

1. "Account" means a contract of deposit between a depositor or depositors and a financial institution; the term includes a checking account, savings account, certificate of deposit, savings certificate, share account, savings bond, and other like arrangements.

2. "Actual knowledge" means written notice to a manager of a branch of a financial institution, or an officer of the financial institution in the course of his or her employment at the branch, pertaining to funds held on deposit in an account maintained by the branch received within a period of time which affords the financial institution a reasonable opportunity to act upon the knowledge.

3. "Agency account" means an account to which funds may be deposited and from which payments may be made by an agent designated by a depositor. In the event there is more than one depositor named on an account, each depositor may designate the same or a different agent for the purpose of depositing to or making payments of funds from a depositor's account.

4. "Agent" means a person designated by a depositor or depositors in a contract of deposit or other document to have the authority to deposit and to make payments from an account in the name of the depositor or depositors.

5. "Depositor," when utilized in determining the rights of individuals to funds in an account, means an individual who owns the funds. When utilized in determining the rights of a financial institution to make or withhold payment, and/or to take any other action with regard to funds held under a contract of deposit, "depositor" means the individual or individuals who have the current right to payment of funds held under the contract of deposit without regard to the actual rights of ownership thereof by these individuals. A trust or P.O.D. account beneficiary becomes a depositor only when the account becomes payable to the beneficiary by reason of having survived the depositor or depositors named on the account, depending upon the provisions of the contract of deposit.

6. "Depositor's funds" or "funds of a depositor" means the amount of all deposits belonging to or made for the benefit of a depositor, less all withdrawals of the funds by the depositor or by others for the depositor's benefit, plus the depositor's prorated share of any interest or dividends included in the current balance of the account and any proceeds of deposit life insurance added to the account by reason of the death of a depositor.

7. "Director" means the director of the department of financial institutions or his or her designee.

8. "Financial institution" means a bank, trust company, mutual savings bank, savings and loan association, or credit union authorized to do business and accept deposits in this state under state or federal law.

9. "Individual" means a human being; "person" includes an individual, corporation, partnership, limited partnership, joint venture, trust, or other entity recognized by law to have separate legal powers.

10. "Joint account with right of survivorship" means an account in the name of two or more depositors and which provides that the funds of a deceased depositor become the property of one or more of the surviving depositors.

11. "Joint account without right of survivorship" means an account in the name of two or more depositors and which contains no provision that the funds of a deceased depositor become the property of the surviving depositor or depositors.

12. "Payment(s)" of sums on deposit includes withdrawal, payment by check or other directive of a depositor or his or her agent, any pledge of sums on deposit by a depositor or his or her agent, any set-off or reduction or other disposition of all or part of an account balance, and any payments to any person under RCW 30A.22.120, 30A.22.140, 30A.22.150, 30A.22.160, 30A.22.170, 30A.22.180, 30A.22.190, 30A.22.200, and 30A.22.220.

13. "Promotional contest of chance" means a promotional contest conducted pursuant to RCW 9.46.0356(1)(b).

14. "Proof of death" means a certified or authenticated copy of a death certificate, or photostatic copy thereof, purporting to be issued by an official or agency of the jurisdiction where the death purportedly occurred, or a certified or authenticated copy of a record or report of a governmental agency, domestic or foreign, that a person is dead. In either case, the proofs constitute prima facie proof of the fact, place, date, and time of death, and identity of the decedent and the status of the dates, circumstances, and places disclosed by the record or report.

15. "Request" means a request for withdrawal, or a check or order for payment, which complies with all conditions of the account, including special requirements concerning necessary signatures and regulations of the financial institution; but if the financial institution conditions withdrawal or payment on advance notice, for purposes of this chapter the request for withdrawal or payment is treated as immediately effective and a notice of intent to withdraw is treated as a request for withdrawal.

16. "Single account" means an account in the name of one depositor only.

17. "Trust or P.O.D. account beneficiary" means a person or persons, other than a codepositor, who has or have been designated by a depositor or depositors to receive the depositor's funds remaining in an account upon the death of a depositor or all depositors.

18. "Trust and P.O.D. accounts" means accounts payable on request to a depositor during the depositor's lifetime, and upon the depositor's death to one or more designated beneficiaries, or which are payable to two or more depositors during their lifetimes, and upon the death of all depositors to one or more designated beneficiaries. The term "trust account" does not include deposits by trustees or other fiduciaries where the trust or fiduciary relationship is established other than by a contract of deposit with a financial institution.

19. "Withdrawal" means payment to a person pursuant to check or other directive of a depositor.

\[ [2014 c 37 § 194](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/2013-14/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/Senate/6135.SL.pdf?cite=2014%20c%2037%20§%20194); [2011 c 336 § 747](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/2011-12/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/Senate/5045.SL.pdf?cite=2011%20c%20336%20§%20747); [2011 c 303 § 4](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/2011-12/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/Senate/5232-S.SL.pdf?cite=2011%20c%20303%20§%204); [1981 c 192 § 4](http://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1981c192.pdf?cite=1981%20c%20192%20§%204); \]

## 30A.22.041 - Definitions.
The definitions in this section apply throughout this section and RCW 30A.22.240 and 30A.22.245.

1. "Customer" means any person, partnership, limited partnership, corporation, trust, or other legal entity that is transacting or has transacted business with a financial institution, that is using or has used the services of an institution, or for which a financial institution has acted or is acting as a fiduciary.

2. "Financial institution" means state and national banks and trust companies, state and federal savings banks, state and federal savings and loan associations, and state and federal credit unions.

3. "Law enforcement officer" means an employee of a public law enforcement agency organized under the authority of a county, city, or town and designated to obtain deposit account information by the chief law enforcement officer of that agency.

\[ [2014 c 37 § 195](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/2013-14/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/Senate/6135.SL.pdf?cite=2014%20c%2037%20§%20195); [1995 c 186 § 1](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/1995-96/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/House/1603.SL.pdf?cite=1995%20c%20186%20§%201); \]

## 30A.22.050 - Types of accounts which financial institution may establish.
The types of accounts in which funds may be deposited with a financial institution include, but are not limited to, the following:

1. A single account;

2. A joint account without right of survivorship;

3. A joint account with right of survivorship;

4. An agency account;

5. A trust or P.O.D. account; and

6. Any compatible combination of the foregoing.

In each case, the type of account shall be determined by the terms of the contract of deposit between the depositor and the financial institution. The financial institution shall describe to a potential depositor the various types of accounts available.

\[ [1981 c 192 § 5](http://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1981c192.pdf?cite=1981%20c%20192%20§%205); \]

## 30A.22.060 - Requirements of contract of deposit.
The contract of deposit shall be in writing and signed by all individuals who have a current right to payment of funds from an account. The designation of an agent, or trust or P.O.D. account beneficiary by a depositor of a joint account without right of survivorship, or the designation of an agent by a depositor of a joint account with right of survivorship or by a depositor of a trust or P.O.D. account does not require the signature of a codepositor. A financial institution may insert such additional terms and conditions in a contract of deposit as it deems appropriate.

\[ [1981 c 192 § 6](http://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1981c192.pdf?cite=1981%20c%20192%20§%206); \]

## 30A.22.070 - Accounts of minors and incompetents.
A minor or incompetent may enter into a valid and enforceable contract of deposit with the financial institution and any account in the name of a minor or incompetent shall, in the absence of clear and convincing evidence of a different intention at the time it is created, be held for the exclusive right and benefit of the minor or incompetent free from the control of all other persons.

\[ [1981 c 192 § 7](http://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1981c192.pdf?cite=1981%20c%20192%20§%207); \]

## 30A.22.080 - Accounts of married persons.
A financial institution may enter into a contract of deposit without regard to whether the depositor is married and without regard as to whether the funds on deposit are the community or separate property of the depositor.

\[ [1981 c 192 § 8](http://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1981c192.pdf?cite=1981%20c%20192%20§%208); \]

## 30A.22.090 - Ownership of funds during lifetime of depositor.
Subject to community property rights, during the lifetime of a depositor, or the joint lifetimes of depositors:

1. Funds on deposit in a single account belong to the depositor.

2. Funds on deposit in a joint account without right of survivorship and in a joint account with right of survivorship belong to the depositors in proportion to the net funds owned by each depositor on deposit in the account, unless the contract of deposit provides otherwise or there is clear and convincing evidence of a contrary intent at the time the account was created.

3. Funds on deposit in a trust or P.O.D. account belong to the depositor and not to the trust or P.O.D. account beneficiary or beneficiaries; if two or more depositors are named on the trust or P.O.D. account, their rights of ownership to the funds on deposit in the account are governed by subsection (2) of this section.

4. Ownership of funds on deposit in an agency account shall be determined in accordance with subsections (1), (2), and (3) of this section depending upon whether the principal is a depositor on a single account, joint account, joint account with right of survivorship, or trust or P.O.D. account.

\[ [1981 c 192 § 9](http://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1981c192.pdf?cite=1981%20c%20192%20§%209); \]

## 30A.22.100 - Ownership of funds after death of a depositor.
Subject to community property rights and subject to the terms and provisions of any community property agreement, upon the death of a depositor:

1. Funds which remain on deposit in a single account belong to the depositor's estate.

2. Funds belonging to a deceased depositor which remain on deposit in a joint account without right of survivorship belong to the depositor's estate, unless the depositor has also designated a trust or P.O.D. account beneficiary of the depositor's interest in the account.

3. Funds belonging to a deceased depositor which remain on deposit in a joint account with right of survivorship belong to the surviving depositors unless there is clear and convincing evidence of a contrary intent at the time the account was created. If there is more than one individual having right of survivorship, the funds belong equally to the surviving depositors unless the contract of deposit otherwise provides. If there is more than one surviving depositor, the rights of survivorship shall continue between the surviving depositors.

4. Funds remaining on deposit in a trust or P.O.D. account belong to the trust or P.O.D. account beneficiary designated by the deceased depositor unless the account has also been designated as a joint account with right of survivorship, in which event the funds remaining on deposit in the account do not belong to the trust or P.O.D. account beneficiary until the death of the last surviving depositor and the rights of the surviving depositors shall be determined by subsection (3) of this section. If the deceased depositor has designated more than one trust or P.O.D. account beneficiary, and more than one of the beneficiaries survive the depositor, the funds belong equally to the surviving beneficiaries unless the depositor has specifically designated a different method of distribution in the contract of deposit; if two or more beneficiaries survive, there is no right of survivorship as between them unless the terms of the account or deposit agreement expressly provide for rights of survivorship between the beneficiaries.

5. Upon the death of a depositor of an agency account, the agency shall terminate and any funds remaining on deposit belonging to the deceased depositor shall become the property of the depositor's estate or such other persons who may be entitled thereto, depending upon whether the account was a single account, joint account, joint account with right of survivorship, or a trust or P.O.D. account.

Any transfers to surviving depositors or to trust or P.O.D. account beneficiaries pursuant to the terms of this section are declared to be effective by reason of the provisions of the account contracts involved and this chapter and are not to be considered as testamentary dispositions. The rights of survivorship and of trust and P.O.D. account beneficiaries arise from the express terms of the contract of deposit and cannot, under any circumstances, be changed by the will of a depositor.

\[ [1981 c 192 § 10](http://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1981c192.pdf?cite=1981%20c%20192%20§%2010); \]

## 30A.22.110 - Controversies between owners.
*RCW 30.22.090 and 30.22.100 are intended to establish ownership of funds on deposit in the accounts stated, as between depositors and/or trust or P.O.D. account beneficiaries, and the provisions thereof are relevant only as to controversies between such persons and their creditors, and other successors, and have no bearing on the power of any person to receive payment of funds maintained in the accounts or the right of a financial institution to make payments to any person as provided by the terms of the contract of deposit.

\[ [1981 c 192 § 11](http://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1981c192.pdf?cite=1981%20c%20192%20§%2011); \]

## 30A.22.120 - Right to rely on form of account—Discharge of financial institutions.
In making payments of funds deposited in an account, a financial institution may rely conclusively and entirely upon the form of the account and the terms of the contract of deposit at the time the payments are made. A financial institution is not required to inquire as to either the source or the ownership of any funds received for deposit to an account, or to the proposed application of any payments made from an account. Unless a financial institution has actual knowledge of the existence of dispute between depositors, beneficiaries, or other persons claiming an interest in funds deposited in an account, all payments made by a financial institution from an account at the request of any depositor to the account and/or the agent of any depositor to the account in accordance with this section and RCW 30A.22.140, 30A.22.150, 30A.22.160, 30A.22.170, 30A.22.180, 30A.22.190, 30A.22.200, and 30A.22.220 shall constitute a complete release and discharge of the financial institution from all claims for the amounts so paid regardless of whether or not the payment is consistent with the actual ownership of the funds deposited in an account by a depositor and/or the actual ownership of the funds as between depositors and/or the beneficiaries of P.O.D. and trust accounts, and/or their heirs, successors, personal representatives, and assigns.

\[ [2014 c 37 § 196](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/2013-14/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/Senate/6135.SL.pdf?cite=2014%20c%2037%20§%20196); [1981 c 192 § 12](http://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1981c192.pdf?cite=1981%20c%20192%20§%2012); \]

## 30A.22.130 - Rights as between individuals preserved.
The protection accorded to financial institutions under RCW 30A.22.120, 30A.22.140, 30A.22.150, 30A.22.160, 30A.22.170, 30A.22.180, 30A.22.190, 30A.22.200, 30A.22.210, and 30A.22.220 shall have no bearing on the actual rights of ownership to deposited funds by a depositor, and/or between depositors, and/or by and between beneficiaries of trust and P.O.D. accounts, and their heirs, successors, personal representatives, and assigns.

\[ [2014 c 37 § 197](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/2013-14/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/Senate/6135.SL.pdf?cite=2014%20c%2037%20§%20197); [1981 c 192 § 13](http://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1981c192.pdf?cite=1981%20c%20192%20§%2013); \]

## 30A.22.140 - Payment of funds to a depositor.
Payments of funds on deposit in a single account may be made by a financial institution to or for the depositor regardless of whether the depositor is, in fact, the actual owner of the funds. Payments of funds on deposit in an account having two or more depositors may be made by a financial institution to or for any one or more of the depositors named on the account without regard to the actual ownership of the funds by or between the depositors, and without regard to whether any other depositor or depositors so named are deceased or incompetent at the time the payments are made.

\[ [1981 c 192 § 14](http://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1981c192.pdf?cite=1981%20c%20192%20§%2014); \]

## 30A.22.150 - Payment to minors and incompetents.
Financial institutions may make payments of funds on deposit in an account established by a depositor who is a minor or incompetent without regard to whether it has actual knowledge of the minority or incompetency of the depositor unless the branch of the financial institution at which the account is maintained has received written notice to withhold payment to the minor or incompetent by the guardian of his or her estate and had a reasonable opportunity to act upon the notice.

\[ [2011 c 336 § 748](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/2011-12/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/Senate/5045.SL.pdf?cite=2011%20c%20336%20§%20748); [1981 c 192 § 15](http://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1981c192.pdf?cite=1981%20c%20192%20§%2015); \]

## 30A.22.160 - Payment to trust and P.O.D. account beneficiaries.
Financial institutions may pay any funds remaining on deposit in an account to a trust or P.O.D. account beneficiary or beneficiaries when the financial institution has received proofs of death of all depositors to the account who pursuant to the terms of the contract of deposit were required to predecease the beneficiary. If there is more than one trust or P.O.D. account beneficiary, financial institutions shall not, unless the contract of deposit otherwise provides, pay to any one such beneficiary more than that amount which is obtained by dividing the total of the funds on deposit in the account by the number of trust or P.O.D. account beneficiaries.

\[ [1981 c 192 § 16](http://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1981c192.pdf?cite=1981%20c%20192%20§%2016); \]

## 30A.22.170 - Payment to agents of depositors.
Any funds on deposit in an account may be paid by a financial institution to or upon the order of any agent of any depositor. The contract of deposit or other document creating such agency may provide, in accordance with chapter 11.125 RCW, that any such agent's powers to receive payments and make withdrawals from an account continues in spite of, or arises by virtue of, the incompetency of a depositor, in which event the agent's powers to make payments and withdrawals from an account on behalf of a depositor is not affected by the incompetency of a depositor. Except as provided in this section, the authority of an agent to receive payments or make withdrawals from an account terminates with the death or incompetency of the agent's principal: PROVIDED, That a financial institution is not liable for any payment or withdrawal made to or by an agent for a deceased or incompetent depositor unless the financial institution making the payment or permitting the withdrawal had actual knowledge of the incompetency or death at the time payment was made.

\[ [2016 c 209 § 405](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/2015-16/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/Senate/5635-S.SL.pdf?cite=2016%20c%20209%20§%20405); [1981 c 192 § 17](http://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1981c192.pdf?cite=1981%20c%20192%20§%2017); \]

## 30A.22.180 - Payment to personal representatives.
Financial institutions may pay any funds remaining on deposit in an account which belongs to a deceased depositor to the personal representative of the depositor's estate under any of the following circumstances:

1. When the decedent was the depositor on a single account; or

2. When the decedent was a depositor on a joint account without right of survivorship or the only surviving depositor on a joint account with right of survivorship, and has not designated a trust or P.O.D. account beneficiary of the decedent's interest, and the financial institution has received the proofs of death necessary to establish the deaths of the other depositors named on the account; or

3. When the decedent was a beneficiary of a P.O.D. or trust account and the financial institution has received proofs of death of the beneficiary and all depositors to the account who, pursuant to the terms of the contract of deposit, were required to predecease the beneficiary; or

4. When consent to the payment has been given in writing by all depositors and beneficiaries of the account; or

5. When so ordered or directed by a superior court of the state or other court having jurisdiction over the matter.

\[ [1981 c 192 § 18](http://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1981c192.pdf?cite=1981%20c%20192%20§%2018); \]

## 30A.22.190 - Payment to heirs and creditors of a deceased depositor.
In each case, where it is provided in RCW 30A.22.180 that a financial institution may make payment of funds deposited in an account to the personal representative of the estate of a deceased depositor or beneficiary, the financial institution may make payment of the funds to the following persons under the circumstances provided:

1. In those instances where the deceased depositor left a surviving spouse, and the deceased depositor and the surviving spouse shall have executed a community property agreement which by its terms would include funds of the deceased depositor remaining in the account, a financial institution may make payment of all funds in the name of the deceased spouse to the surviving spouse upon receipt of a certified copy of the community property agreement as recorded in the office of a county auditor of the state and an affidavit of the surviving spouse that the community property agreement was validly executed and in full force and effect upon the death of the depositor.

2. In those instances where the balance of the funds in the name of a deceased depositor does not exceed two thousand five hundred dollars, payment of the decedent's funds remaining in the account may be made to the surviving spouse, next of kin, funeral director, or other creditor who may appear to be entitled thereto upon receipt of proof of death and an affidavit to the effect that no personal representative has been appointed for the deceased depositor's estate. As a condition to the payment, a financial institution may require such waivers, indemnity, receipts, and acquittance and additional proofs as it may consider proper.

3. In those instances where the person entitled presents an affidavit which meets the requirements of chapter 11.62 RCW.

A person receiving a payment from a financial institution pursuant to subsections (2) and (3) of this section is answerable and accountable therefor to any personal representative of the deceased depositor's estate wherever and whenever appointed.

\[ [2014 c 37 § 198](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/2013-14/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/Senate/6135.SL.pdf?cite=2014%20c%2037%20§%20198); [1989 c 220 § 3](http://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1989c220.pdf?cite=1989%20c%20220%20§%203); [1981 c 192 § 19](http://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1981c192.pdf?cite=1981%20c%20192%20§%2019); \]

## 30A.22.200 - Payment to foreign personal representative—Release of financial institution.
In each case where it is provided in this chapter that payment may be made to the personal representative of the estate of a deceased depositor or trust or P.O.D. account beneficiary, financial institutions may make payment of the funds on deposit in a deceased depositor's or beneficiary's account to the personal representative of the decedent's estate appointed under the laws of any other state or territory or country after:

1. At least sixty days have elapsed since the date of the deceased depositor's death; and

2. Upon receipt of the following:

    a. Proof of death of the deceased depositor or beneficiary;

    b. Proof of the appointment and continuing authority of the personal representative requesting payment;

    c. The personal representative's, or its agent's, affidavit to the effect that to the best of his or her knowledge no personal representative has been or will be appointed under the laws of this state; and

    d. Receipt of either an estate tax release from the department of revenue or the personal representative's, or its agent's, affidavit that the estate is not subject to Washington estate tax. However, if a personal representative of the deceased depositor's or beneficiary's estate is appointed and qualified as such under the laws of this state, and delivers proof of the appointment and qualification to the office or branch of the financial institution in which the deposit is maintained prior to the transmissions of the sums on deposit to the foreign personal representative, then the funds shall be paid to the personal representative of the deceased depositor's or beneficiary's estate who has been appointed and qualified in this state.

3. The financial institution paying, delivering, transferring, or issuing funds on deposit in a deceased depositor's or beneficiary's account in accordance with the provisions of this section is discharged and released to the same extent as if such person has dealt with a personal representative of the decedent, unless at the time of such payment, delivery, transfer, or issuance such institution had actual knowledge of the falsity of any statement or affidavit required to be provided under this section. Such institution is not required to see to the application of funds, or to inquire into the truth of any matter specified in any statement or affidavit required to be provided under this section.

\[ [1988 c 29 § 9](http://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1988c29.pdf?cite=1988%20c%2029%20§%209); [1981 c 192 § 20](http://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1981c192.pdf?cite=1981%20c%20192%20§%2020); \]

## 30A.22.210 - Authority to withhold payment—Vulnerable adults.
1. Nothing contained in this chapter shall be deemed to require any financial institution to make any payment from an account to a depositor, or any trust or P.O.D. account beneficiary, or any other person claiming an interest in any funds deposited in the account, if the financial institution has actual knowledge of the existence of a dispute between the depositors, beneficiaries, or other persons concerning their respective rights of ownerships to the funds contained in, or proposed to be withdrawn, or previously withdrawn from the account, or in the event the financial institution is otherwise uncertain as to who is entitled to the funds pursuant to the contract of deposit. In any such case, the financial institution may, without liability, notify, in writing, all depositors, beneficiaries, or other persons claiming an interest in the account of either its uncertainty as to who is entitled to the distributions or the existence of any dispute, and may also, without liability, refuse to disburse any funds contained in the account to any depositor, and/or trust or P.O.D. account beneficiary thereof, and/or other persons claiming an interest therein, until such time as either:

    a. All such depositors and/or beneficiaries have consented, in writing, to the requested payment; or

    b. The payment is authorized or directed by a court of proper jurisdiction.

2. If a financial institution reasonably believes that financial exploitation of a vulnerable adult, as defined in RCW 74.34.020, may have occurred, may have been attempted, or is being attempted, the financial institution may refuse a transaction as permitted under RCW 74.34.215.

\[ [2010 c 133 § 1](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/2009-10/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/Senate/6202-S.SL.pdf?cite=2010%20c%20133%20§%201); [1981 c 192 § 21](http://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1981c192.pdf?cite=1981%20c%20192%20§%2021); \]

## 30A.22.220 - Adverse claim bond.
Notwithstanding RCW 30A.22.210, a financial institution may, without liability, pay or permit withdrawal of any funds on deposit in an account to a depositor and/or agent of a depositor and/or trust or P.O.D. account beneficiary, and/or other person claiming an interest therein, even when the financial institution has actual knowledge of the existence of the dispute, if the adverse claimant shall execute to the financial institution, in form and with security acceptable to it, a bond in an amount which is double either the amount of the deposit or the adverse claim, whichever is the lesser, indemnifying the financial institution from any and all liability, loss, damage, costs, and expenses, for and on account of the payment of the adverse claim or the dishonor of the check or other order of the person in whose name the deposit stands on the books of the financial institution: PROVIDED, That where the person in whose name the deposit stands is a fiduciary for the adverse claimant, and the facts constituting such relationship, and also the facts showing reasonable cause of belief on the part of the claimant that the fiduciary is about to misappropriate the deposit, are made to appear by the affidavit of the claimant, the financial institution shall, without liability, refuse to deliver the property for a period of not more than five business days from the date that the financial institution receives the adverse claimant's affidavit, without liability for the sufficiency or truth of the facts alleged in the affidavit, after which time the claim shall be treated as any other claim under this section.

\[ [2014 c 37 § 199](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/2013-14/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/Senate/6135.SL.pdf?cite=2014%20c%2037%20§%20199); [1981 c 192 § 22](http://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1981c192.pdf?cite=1981%20c%20192%20§%2022); \]

## 30A.22.230 - Authority to charge a customer for furnishing items or copies of items.
A financial institution may charge a customer for furnishing items or copies of items as defined in RCW 62A.4-104, in excess of the number of free items or copies of items provided for in RCW 62A.4-406(b), fifty cents per copy furnished plus fees for retrieval at a rate not to exceed the rate assessed when complying with summons issued by the Internal Revenue Service.

\[ [1993 c 229 § 118](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/1993-94/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/House/1014-S.SL.pdf?cite=1993%20c%20229%20§%20118); \]

## 30A.22.240 - Records—Disclosure—Requests by law enforcement—Fees.
1. If a financial institution discloses information in good faith concerning its customer or customers in accordance with this section, it shall not be liable to its customers or others for such disclosure or its consequences. Good faith will be presumed if the financial institution follows the procedures set forth in this section.

2. A request for financial records made by a law enforcement officer shall be submitted to the financial institution in writing stating that the officer is conducting a criminal investigation of actual or attempted withdrawals from an account at the institution and that the officer reasonably believes a statutory notice of dishonor has been given pursuant to RCW 62A.3-515, fifteen days have elapsed, and the item remains unpaid. The request shall include the name and number of the account and be accompanied by a copy of:

    a. The front and back of at least one unpaid check or draft drawn on the account that has been presented for payment no fewer than two times or has been drawn on a closed account; and

    b. A statement of the dates or time period relevant to the investigation.

3. To the extent permitted by federal law, under subsection (2) of this section a financial institution shall within a reasonable time disclose to a requesting law enforcement officer so much of the following information as has been requested concerning the account upon which the dishonored check or draft was drawn, to the extent the records can be located:

    a. The date the account was opened; the details and amount of the opening deposit to the account; and if closed, the reason the account was closed, the date the account was closed, and balance at date of closing;

    b. A copy of the statements of the account for the relevant period including dates under investigation and the preceding and following thirty days and the closing statement, if the account was closed;

    c. A copy of the front and back of the signature card; and

    d. If the account was closed by the financial institution, the name of the person notified of its closing and a copy of the notice of the account's closing and whether such notice was returned undelivered.

4. Financial institutions may charge requesting parties a reasonable fee for the actual costs of providing services under this chapter. These fees may not exceed rates charged to federal agencies for similar requests. In the event an investigation results in conviction, the court may order the defendant to pay costs incurred by law enforcement under chapter 186, Laws of 1995.

\[ [1995 c 186 § 2](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/1995-96/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/House/1603.SL.pdf?cite=1995%20c%20186%20§%202); \]

## 30A.22.245 - Records—Admission as evidence—Certificate.
Records obtained pursuant to this chapter shall be admitted as evidence in all courts of this state, under Washington rule of evidence 902, when accompanied by a certificate substantially in the following form:

CERTIFICATE

1. The accompanying documents are true and correct copies of the records of [name of financial institution]. The records were made in the regular course of business of the financial institution at or near the time of the acts, events, or conditions which they reflect.

2. They are produced in response to a request made under *RCW 30.22.240.

3. The undersigned is authorized to execute this certificate. I CERTIFY, under penalty of perjury under the laws of the State of Washington, that the foregoing statements are true and correct.

————————DateSignature————————Place of SigningType or Print Name/ Title/Telephone No.

————

————

Date

Signature

————

————

Place of Signing

Type or Print Name/

 

Title/Telephone No.

\[ [1995 c 186 § 3](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/1995-96/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/House/1603.SL.pdf?cite=1995%20c%20186%20§%203); \]

## 30A.22.250 - No duty to request information.
RCW 9.38.015 does not create a duty for financial institutions to request the information set forth in RCW 9.38.015(1).

\[ [1995 c 186 § 5](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/1995-96/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/House/1603.SL.pdf?cite=1995%20c%20186%20§%205); \]

## 30A.22.260 - Promotional contests of chance—Director's authority.
1. If approved by its board of directors, a financial institution may conduct a promotional contest of chance as permitted under RCW 9.46.0356(1)(b).

2. A financial institution must not conduct a savings promotional contest of chance, if, in the opinion of the director:

    a. It is likely to or does adversely affect the financial institution's safety and soundness;

    b. It is administered in an unsafe and unsound or imprudent manner, or in a manner that is likely to or does result in actual or potential reputational harm to the financial institution; or

    c. It is likely to or has misled the financial institution's members, depositors, or the general public.

3. The director may examine the conduct of a promotional contest of chance pursuant to his or her supervisory and examination powers under:

    a. *Title 30 RCW, in regard to a bank;

    b. Title 32 RCW, in regard to a mutual or stock savings bank; or

    c. Chapter 31.12 RCW, in regard to a state credit union.

4. The director may exercise his or her full enforcement powers under the titles and chapter in subsection (3) of this section and may issue a cease and desist order for a violation of this section.

5. A financial institution must maintain records sufficient to facilitate an audit of a promotional contest of chance, and must provide those records to the director upon request.

\[ [2011 c 303 § 5](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/2011-12/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/Senate/5232-S.SL.pdf?cite=2011%20c%20303%20§%205); \]

## 30A.22.900 - Effective date—1981 c 192.
This act shall take effect on July 1, 1982.

\[ [1981 c 192 § 34](http://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1981c192.pdf?cite=1981%20c%20192%20§%2034); \]

## 30A.22.902 - Construction—Chapter applicable to state registered domestic partnerships—2009 c 521.
For the purposes of this chapter, the terms spouse, marriage, marital, husband, wife, widow, widower, next of kin, and family shall be interpreted as applying equally to state registered domestic partnerships or individuals in state registered domestic partnerships as well as to marital relationships and married persons, and references to dissolution of marriage shall apply equally to state registered domestic partnerships that have been terminated, dissolved, or invalidated, to the extent that such interpretation does not conflict with federal law. Where necessary to implement chapter 521, Laws of 2009, gender-specific terms such as husband and wife used in any statute, rule, or other law shall be construed to be gender neutral, and applicable to individuals in state registered domestic partnerships.

\[ [2009 c 521 § 76](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/2009-10/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/Senate/5688-S2.SL.pdf?cite=2009%20c%20521%20§%2076); \]

