# 50.12 - Administration.
* [50.12.010 - Commissioner's duties and powers.](#5012010---commissioners-duties-and-powers)
* [50.12.020 - Personnel appointed by commissioner.](#5012020---personnel-appointed-by-commissioner)
* [50.12.031 - Personnel board—Travel expenses of board.](#5012031---personnel-boardtravel-expenses-of-board)
* [50.12.040 - Rule-making authority.](#5012040---rule-making-authority)
* [50.12.042 - Rules—2003 2nd sp.s. c 4.](#5012042---rules2003-2nd-sps-c-4)
* [50.12.045 - Contract to issue conditional federal employer identification numbers, credentials, and documents in conjunction with license applications.](#5012045---contract-to-issue-conditional-federal-employer-identification-numbers-credentials-and-documents-in-conjunction-with-license-applications)
* [50.12.050 - Reciprocal benefit arrangements.](#5012050---reciprocal-benefit-arrangements)
* [50.12.060 - Reciprocal coverage arrangements.](#5012060---reciprocal-coverage-arrangements)
* [50.12.070 - Employing unit records, reports, and registration—Unified business identifier account number records—Penalty for failure to keep records. (Effective until October 1, 2021.)](#5012070---employing-unit-records-reports-and-registrationunified-business-identifier-account-number-recordspenalty-for-failure-to-keep-records-effective-until-october-1-2021)
* [50.12.072 - Employer fails to register—Employer fails to obtain employment security account number—Penalties.](#5012072---employer-fails-to-registeremployer-fails-to-obtain-employment-security-account-numberpenalties)
* [50.12.080 - Arbitrary reports.](#5012080---arbitrary-reports)
* [50.12.090 - Interstate use of employing unit records.](#5012090---interstate-use-of-employing-unit-records)
* [50.12.100 - Compulsory production of records and information.](#5012100---compulsory-production-of-records-and-information)
* [50.12.120 - Protection against self-incrimination.](#5012120---protection-against-self-incrimination)
* [50.12.130 - Oaths and witnesses—Subpoenas—Application for court approval prior to issuance—No notice required.](#5012130---oaths-and-witnessessubpoenasapplication-for-court-approval-prior-to-issuanceno-notice-required)
* [50.12.140 - Destruction of office records.](#5012140---destruction-of-office-records)
* [50.12.150 - Representation by attorney general.](#5012150---representation-by-attorney-general)
* [50.12.160 - Publication of title, rules and regulations, etc.](#5012160---publication-of-title-rules-and-regulations-etc)
* [50.12.170 - Services and fees of sheriffs.](#5012170---services-and-fees-of-sheriffs)
* [50.12.180 - State-federal cooperation.](#5012180---state-federal-cooperation)
* [50.12.190 - Employment stabilization.](#5012190---employment-stabilization)
* [50.12.200 - State advisory council—Committees and councils.](#5012200---state-advisory-councilcommittees-and-councils)
* [50.12.210 - Employment services for persons with disabilities—Report to legislative committees.](#5012210---employment-services-for-persons-with-disabilitiesreport-to-legislative-committees)
* [50.12.220 - Penalties for late reports or contributions—Warning—Assessment—Waiver—Appeal. (Effective until October 1, 2021.)](#5012220---penalties-for-late-reports-or-contributionswarningassessmentwaiverappeal-effective-until-october-1-2021)
* [50.12.230 - Job skills training program—Department's duties.](#5012230---job-skills-training-programdepartments-duties)
* [50.12.235 - Washington conservation corps—Department's duties.](#5012235---washington-conservation-corpsdepartments-duties)
* [50.12.240 - On-the-job training—Employer qualifications established by rule.](#5012240---on-the-job-trainingemployer-qualifications-established-by-rule)
* [50.12.245 - Cooperation with workforce training and education coordinating board.](#5012245---cooperation-with-workforce-training-and-education-coordinating-board)
* [50.12.250 - Information clearinghouse to assist in employment of persons of disability.](#5012250---information-clearinghouse-to-assist-in-employment-of-persons-of-disability)
* [50.12.252 - Information clearinghouse—Consultation on establishment.](#5012252---information-clearinghouseconsultation-on-establishment)
* [50.12.290 - Printed materials—Department's duties.](#5012290---printed-materialsdepartments-duties)
* [50.12.300 - Professional employer organizations—Reports and records.](#5012300---professional-employer-organizationsreports-and-records)
* [50.12.310 - Professional employer organizations—Revocation of authority to act as coemployer.](#5012310---professional-employer-organizationsrevocation-of-authority-to-act-as-coemployer)
* [50.12.320 - Labor market research—High-demand green industries—Middle or high-wage occupations.](#5012320---labor-market-researchhigh-demand-green-industriesmiddle-or-high-wage-occupations)
* [50.12.330 - Domestic violence employment poster.](#5012330---domestic-violence-employment-poster)
* [50.12.340 - Report to legislature. (Effective October 1, 2021.)](#5012340---report-to-legislature-effective-october-1-2021)
* [50.12.350 - Use of social security numbers in correspondence with third parties.](#5012350---use-of-social-security-numbers-in-correspondence-with-third-parties)
* [50.12.355 - Report—Unemployment trust fund—Minimum weekly benefit increase—Wages subject to tax. (Expires January 31, 2026.)](#5012355---reportunemployment-trust-fundminimum-weekly-benefit-increasewages-subject-to-tax-expires-january-31-2026)
* [50.12.360 - Unemployment insurance claim adjudicator training program—Report.](#5012360---unemployment-insurance-claim-adjudicator-training-programreport)
* [50.12.365 - Plain language required for letters, alerts, and notices.](#5012365---plain-language-required-for-letters-alerts-and-notices)
* [50.12.370 - Unemployment insurance claims—Online data dashboard—Quarterly reports, performance metrics.](#5012370---unemployment-insurance-claimsonline-data-dashboardquarterly-reports-performance-metrics)
## 50.12.010 - Commissioner's duties and powers.
1. The commissioner shall administer this title. He or she shall have the power and authority to adopt, amend, or rescind such rules and regulations, to employ such persons, make such expenditures, require such reports, make such investigations, and take such other action as he or she deems necessary or suitable to that end. Such rules and regulations shall be effective upon publication and in the manner, not inconsistent with the provisions of this title, which the commissioner shall prescribe. The commissioner, in accordance with the provisions of this title, shall determine the organization and methods of procedure of the divisions referred to in this title, and shall have an official seal which shall be judicially noticed. The commissioner shall submit to the governor a report covering the administration and operation of this title during the preceding fiscal year, July 1st through June 30th, and shall make such recommendations for amendments to this title as he or she deems proper. Such report shall include a balance sheet of the moneys in the fund in which there shall be provided, if possible, a reserve against the liability in future years to pay benefits in excess of the then current contributions, which reserve shall be set up by the commissioner in accordance with accepted actuarial principles on the basis of statistics of employment, business activity, and other relevant factors for the longest possible period. Whenever the commissioner believes that a change in contribution or benefit rates will become necessary to protect the solvency of the fund, he or she shall promptly so inform the governor and legislature and make recommendations with respect thereto.

2. There is established a unit within the department for the purpose of detection and investigation of fraud under this title. The department will employ supervisory and investigative personnel for the program, who must be qualified by training and experience.

3. The commissioner or the commissioner's duly authorized designee is authorized to receive criminal history record information that includes nonconviction data for any purpose associated with the investigation for abuse or fraud under chapter 50.20 RCW. Dissemination or use of nonconviction data for purposes other than that authorized in this section is prohibited.

\[ [2010 c 8 § 13013](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/2009-10/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/Senate/6239-S.SL.pdf?cite=2010%20c%208%20§%2013013); [2008 c 74 § 5](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/2007-08/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/House/2955.SL.pdf?cite=2008%20c%2074%20§%205); [1977 c 75 § 75](https://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1977c75.pdf?cite=1977%20c%2075%20§%2075); [1955 c 286 § 1](https://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1955c286.pdf?cite=1955%20c%20286%20§%201); [1949 c 214 § 7](https://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1949c214.pdf?cite=1949%20c%20214%20§%207); [1945 c 35 § 40](https://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1945c35.pdf?cite=1945%20c%2035%20§%2040); Rem. Supp. 1949 § 9998-178; [1943 c 127 § 8](https://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1943c127.pdf?cite=1943%20c%20127%20§%208); [1941 c 253 § 8](https://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1941c253.pdf?cite=1941%20c%20253%20§%208); [1939 c 12 § 2](https://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1939c12.pdf?cite=1939%20c%2012%20§%202); \]

## 50.12.020 - Personnel appointed by commissioner.
The commissioner is authorized to appoint and fix the compensation of such officers, accountants, experts, and other personnel as may be necessary to carry out the provisions of this title: PROVIDED, That such appointment shall be made on a nonpartisan merit basis in accordance with the provisions of this title relating to the selection of personnel. The commissioner may delegate to any person appointed such power and authority as the commissioner deems reasonable and proper for the effective administration of this title, including the right to decide matters placed in the commissioner's discretion under this title, and may in his or her discretion bond any person handling moneys or signing checks hereunder.

\[ [1985 c 96 § 1](https://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1985c96.pdf?cite=1985%20c%2096%20§%201); [1973 1st ex.s. c 158 § 2](https://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1973ex1c158.pdf?cite=1973%201st%20ex.s.%20c%20158%20§%202); [1945 c 35 § 41](https://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1945c35.pdf?cite=1945%20c%2035%20§%2041); Rem. Supp. 1945 § 9998-179; [1943 c 127 § 8](https://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1943c127.pdf?cite=1943%20c%20127%20§%208); [1941 c 253 § 8](https://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1941c253.pdf?cite=1941%20c%20253%20§%208); [1939 c 214 § 9](https://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1939c214.pdf?cite=1939%20c%20214%20§%209); [1937 c 162 § 11](https://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1937c162.pdf?cite=1937%20c%20162%20§%2011); \]

## 50.12.031 - Personnel board—Travel expenses of board.
Members of the board shall be allowed travel expenses in accordance with RCW 43.03.050 and 43.03.060 as now existing or hereafter amended while traveling to and from and attending regularly called meetings.

\[ 1975-'76 2nd ex.s. c 34 § 148; [1959 c 127 § 2](https://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1959c127.pdf?cite=1959%20c%20127%20§%202); \]

## 50.12.040 - Rule-making authority.
Permanent and emergency rules shall be adopted, amended, or repealed by the commissioner in accordance with the provisions of Title 34 RCW and the rules adopted pursuant thereto: PROVIDED, That the commissioner may not adopt rules after July 23, 1995, that are based solely on a section of law stating a statute's intent or purpose, on the enabling provisions of the statute establishing the agency, or on any combination of such provisions, for statutory authority to adopt any rule.

\[ [1995 c 403 § 109](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/1995-96/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/House/1010-S.SL.pdf?cite=1995%20c%20403%20§%20109); [1973 1st ex.s. c 158 § 3](https://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1973ex1c158.pdf?cite=1973%201st%20ex.s.%20c%20158%20§%203); [1945 c 35 § 43](https://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1945c35.pdf?cite=1945%20c%2035%20§%2043); Rem. Supp. 1945 § 9998-181; [1943 c 127 § 8](https://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1943c127.pdf?cite=1943%20c%20127%20§%208); [1941 c 253 § 8](https://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1941c253.pdf?cite=1941%20c%20253%20§%208); [1939 c 214 § 9](https://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1939c214.pdf?cite=1939%20c%20214%20§%209); [1937 c 162 § 11](https://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1937c162.pdf?cite=1937%20c%20162%20§%2011); \]

## 50.12.042 - Rules—2003 2nd sp.s. c 4.
The commissioner of the employment security department may adopt such rules as are necessary to implement chapter 4, Laws of 2003 2nd sp. sess.

\[ [2003 2nd sp.s. c 4 § 34](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/2003-04/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/Senate/6097.SL.pdf?cite=2003%202nd%20sp.s.%20c%204%20§%2034); \]

## 50.12.045 - Contract to issue conditional federal employer identification numbers, credentials, and documents in conjunction with license applications.
The commissioner may contract with the federal internal revenue service, or other appropriate federal agency, to issue conditional federal employer identification numbers, or other federal credentials or documents, at specified offices and locations of the agency in conjunction with any application for state licenses under chapter 19.02 RCW.

\[ [1997 c 51 § 5](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/1997-98/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/House/1249-S.SL.pdf?cite=1997%20c%2051%20§%205); \]

## 50.12.050 - Reciprocal benefit arrangements.
As used in this section the terms "other state" and "another state" shall be deemed to include any state or territory of the United States, the District of Columbia, the Commonwealth of Puerto Rico and any foreign government and, where applicable, shall also be deemed to include the federal government or provisions of a law of the federal government, as the case may be.

As used in this section the term "claim" shall be deemed to include whichever of the following terms is applicable, to wit: "Application for initial determination", "claim for waiting period credit", or "claim for benefits".

The commissioner shall enter into an agreement with any other state whereby in the event an individual files a claim in another state against wages earned in employment in this state, or against wage credits earned in this state and in any other state or who files a claim in this state against wage credits earned in employment in any other state, or against wages earned in this state and in any other state, the claim will be paid by this state or another state as designated by the agreement in accordance with a determination on the claim as provided by the agreement and pursuant to the qualification and disqualification provisions of this title or under the provisions of the law of the designated paying state (including another state) or under such a combination of the provisions of both laws as shall be determined by the commissioner as being fair and reasonable to all affected interests, and whereby the wages of such individual, if earned in two or more states (including another state) may be combined, and further, whereby this state or another state shall reimburse the paying state in an amount which shall bear the same ratio to the amount of benefits already paid as the amount of wage credits transferred by this state or another state, and used in the determination, bear to the total wage credits used in computing the claimant's maximum amount of benefits potentially payable.

Whenever any claim is filed by an individual involving the combination of wages or a reciprocal arrangement for the payment of benefits, which is governed by the provisions of this section, the employment security department of this state, when not designated as the paying state, shall promptly make a report to the other state making the determination, showing wages earned in employment in this state.

The commissioner is hereby authorized to make to another state and to receive from another state reimbursements from or to the unemployment compensation fund in accordance with arrangements made pursuant to the provisions of this section.

\[ [1977 ex.s. c 292 § 9](https://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1977ex1c292.pdf?cite=1977%20ex.s.%20c%20292%20§%209); [1971 c 3 § 11](https://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1971c3.pdf?cite=1971%20c%203%20§%2011); [1959 c 266 § 1](https://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1959c266.pdf?cite=1959%20c%20266%20§%201); [1949 c 214 § 8](https://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1949c214.pdf?cite=1949%20c%20214%20§%208); [1945 c 35 § 44](https://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1945c35.pdf?cite=1945%20c%2035%20§%2044); Rem. Supp. 1949 § 9998-182; [1943 c 127 § 8](https://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1943c127.pdf?cite=1943%20c%20127%20§%208); [1941 c 253 § 8](https://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1941c253.pdf?cite=1941%20c%20253%20§%208); [1939 c 214 § 9](https://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1939c214.pdf?cite=1939%20c%20214%20§%209); [1937 c 162 § 11](https://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1937c162.pdf?cite=1937%20c%20162%20§%2011); \]

## 50.12.060 - Reciprocal coverage arrangements.
The commissioner is hereby authorized to enter into arrangements with the appropriate agencies of other states, foreign governments, or the federal government whereby services performed by an individual for a single employing unit for which services are customarily performed in more than one state shall be deemed to be services performed entirely within any one of the states (1) in which any part of such individual's service is performed, or (2) in which such individual has his or her residence, or (3) in which the employing unit maintains a place of business: PROVIDED, That there is in effect, as to such services, an election by the employing unit with the acquiescence of such individual, approved by the agency charged with the administration of such state's unemployment compensation law, pursuant to which all the services performed by such individual for such employing unit are deemed to be performed entirely within such state.

\[ [2010 c 8 § 13014](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/2009-10/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/Senate/6239-S.SL.pdf?cite=2010%20c%208%20§%2013014); [1945 c 35 § 45](https://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1945c35.pdf?cite=1945%20c%2035%20§%2045); Rem. Supp. 1945 § 9998-183; [1943 c 127 § 8](https://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1943c127.pdf?cite=1943%20c%20127%20§%208); [1941 c 253 § 8](https://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1941c253.pdf?cite=1941%20c%20253%20§%208); [1939 c 214 § 9](https://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1939c214.pdf?cite=1939%20c%20214%20§%209); [1937 c 162 § 11](https://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1937c162.pdf?cite=1937%20c%20162%20§%2011); \]

## 50.12.070 - Employing unit records, reports, and registration—Unified business identifier account number records—Penalty for failure to keep records. (Effective until October 1, 2021.)
1. [Empty]

   a. Each employing unit shall keep true and accurate work records, containing such information as the commissioner may prescribe. Such records shall be open to inspection and be subject to being copied by the commissioner or his or her authorized representatives at any reasonable time and as often as may be necessary. The commissioner may require from any employing unit any sworn or unsworn reports with respect to persons employed by it, which he or she deems necessary for the effective administration of this title.

   b. An employer who contracts with another person or entity for work subject to chapter 18.27 or 19.28 RCW shall obtain and preserve a record of the unified business identifier account number for and compensation paid to the person or entity performing the work. In addition to the penalty in subsection (3) of this section, failure to obtain or maintain the record is subject to RCW 39.06.010.

2. [Empty]

   a. Each employer shall register with the department and obtain an employment security account number. Each employer shall make periodic reports at such intervals as the commissioner may by regulation prescribe, setting forth the remuneration paid for employment to workers in its employ, the full names and social security numbers of all such workers, and the total hours worked by each worker and such other information as the commissioner may by regulation prescribe.

   b. If the employing unit fails or has failed to report the number of hours in a reporting period for which a worker worked, such number will be computed by the commissioner and given the same force and effect as if it had been reported by the employing unit. In computing the number of such hours worked, the total wages for the reporting period, as reported by the employing unit, shall be divided by the dollar amount of the state's minimum wage in effect for such reporting period and the quotient, disregarding any remainder, shall be credited to the worker: PROVIDED, That although the computation so made will not be subject to appeal by the employing unit, monetary entitlement may be redetermined upon request if the department is provided with credible evidence of the actual hours worked. Benefits paid using computed hours are not considered an overpayment and are not subject to collections when the correction of computed hours results in an invalid or reduced claim; however:

      i. A contribution paying employer who fails to report the number of hours worked will have its experience rating account charged for all benefits paid that are based on hours computed under this subsection; and

      ii. An employer who reimburses the trust fund for benefits paid to workers and fails to report the number of hours worked shall reimburse the trust fund for all benefits paid that are based on hours computed under this subsection.

3. Any employer who fails to keep and preserve records required by this section shall be subject to a penalty determined by the commissioner but not to exceed two hundred fifty dollars or two hundred percent of the quarterly tax for each offense, whichever is greater.

\[ [2013 c 250 § 1](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/2013-14/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/Senate/5227-S.SL.pdf?cite=2013%20c%20250%20§%201); [2009 c 432 § 11](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/2009-10/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/House/1555-S.SL.pdf?cite=2009%20c%20432%20§%2011); [2008 c 120 § 7](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/2007-08/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/Senate/6732-S2.SL.pdf?cite=2008%20c%20120%20§%207); [2007 c 146 § 1](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/2007-08/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/Senate/5373-S.SL.pdf?cite=2007%20c%20146%20§%201); [1997 c 54 § 2](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/1997-98/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/House/1514.SL.pdf?cite=1997%20c%2054%20§%202); [1983 1st ex.s. c 23 § 8](https://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1983ex1c23.pdf?cite=1983%201st%20ex.s.%20c%2023%20§%208); [1977 ex.s. c 33 § 3](https://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1977ex1c33.pdf?cite=1977%20ex.s.%20c%2033%20§%203); [1975 1st ex.s. c 228 § 2](https://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1975ex1c228.pdf?cite=1975%201st%20ex.s.%20c%20228%20§%202); [1945 c 35 § 46](https://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1945c35.pdf?cite=1945%20c%2035%20§%2046); Rem. Supp. 1945 § 9998-184; [1943 c 127 § 8](https://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1943c127.pdf?cite=1943%20c%20127%20§%208); [1939 c 214 § 9](https://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1939c214.pdf?cite=1939%20c%20214%20§%209); [1937 c 162 § 11](https://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1937c162.pdf?cite=1937%20c%20162%20§%2011); \]

## 50.12.072 - Employer fails to register—Employer fails to obtain employment security account number—Penalties.
An employer that knowingly fails to register with the department and obtain an employment security account number, as required under RCW 50.12.070(2), is subject to a penalty not to exceed one thousand dollars per quarter or two times the taxes due per quarter, whichever is greater. This penalty is in addition to all other penalties and is in addition to higher rates for employers that do not meet the definition of "qualified employer" under RCW 50.29.010. This penalty does not apply if the employer can prove that it had good cause to believe that it was not required to register with the department.

\[ [2010 c 72 § 2](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/2009-10/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/Senate/6524-S.SL.pdf?cite=2010%20c%2072%20§%202); \]

## 50.12.080 - Arbitrary reports.
If any employing unit fails to make or file any report or return required by this title, or any regulation made pursuant hereto, the commissioner may, upon the basis of such knowledge as may be available to him or her, arbitrarily make a report on behalf of such employing unit and the report so made shall be deemed to be prima facie correct. In any action or proceedings brought for the recovery of contributions, interest, or penalties due upon the payroll of an employer, the certificate of the department that an audit has been made of the payroll of such employer pursuant to the direction of the department, or a certificate that a return has been filed by or for an employer or estimated by reason of lack of a return, shall be prima facie evidence of the amount of such payroll for the period stated in the certificate.

\[ [2010 c 8 § 13015](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/2009-10/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/Senate/6239-S.SL.pdf?cite=2010%20c%208%20§%2013015); [1983 1st ex.s. c 23 § 9](https://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1983ex1c23.pdf?cite=1983%201st%20ex.s.%20c%2023%20§%209); [1951 c 215 § 2](https://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1951c215.pdf?cite=1951%20c%20215%20§%202); [1945 c 35 § 47](https://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1945c35.pdf?cite=1945%20c%2035%20§%2047); Rem. Supp. 1945 § 9998-185; [1943 c 127 § 8](https://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1943c127.pdf?cite=1943%20c%20127%20§%208); \]

## 50.12.090 - Interstate use of employing unit records.
The records of an employer maintained in this state pertaining to employment of persons in another state shall be open to representatives of the commissioner to permit cooperation with other state unemployment compensation agencies in ascertaining information necessary to administer the unemployment compensation acts of such other states.

\[ [1945 c 35 § 48](https://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1945c35.pdf?cite=1945%20c%2035%20§%2048); Rem. Supp. 1945 § 9998-186; \]

## 50.12.100 - Compulsory production of records and information.
In case of contumacy or refusal to obey subpoenas issued to any person, any court of the state within the jurisdiction of which the inquiry is carried on, or within the jurisdiction of which said person guilty of contumacy or refusal to obey is found or resides or transacts business, upon application by any duly authorized representative of the commissioner, shall have jurisdiction to issue to such person an order requiring such person to appear before such authorized representative, there to produce evidence, if so ordered, or there to give testimony touching the matter under investigation, or in question. Failure to obey such order of the court may be punished by said court as a contempt thereof.

\[ [1945 c 35 § 49](https://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1945c35.pdf?cite=1945%20c%2035%20§%2049); Rem. Supp. 1945 § 9998-187; [1939 c 214 § 9](https://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1939c214.pdf?cite=1939%20c%20214%20§%209); [1937 c 162 § 11](https://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1937c162.pdf?cite=1937%20c%20162%20§%2011); \]

## 50.12.120 - Protection against self-incrimination.
No person shall be excused from attending and testifying or from producing books, papers, correspondence, memoranda, and other records before any duly authorized representative of the commissioner or any appeal tribunal in obedience to the subpoena of such representative of the commissioner or such appeal tribunal, on the ground that the testimony or evidence, documentary or otherwise, required of him or her may tend to incriminate him or her or subject him or her to a penalty or forfeiture; but no individual shall be prosecuted or subjected to any penalty or forfeiture for or on account of any transaction, matter, or thing concerning which he or she is compelled, after having claimed his or her privilege against self-incrimination, to testify or produce evidence, documentary or otherwise, except that such individual so testifying shall not be exempt from prosecution and punishment for perjury committed in so testifying.

\[ [2010 c 8 § 13016](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/2009-10/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/Senate/6239-S.SL.pdf?cite=2010%20c%208%20§%2013016); [1945 c 35 § 51](https://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1945c35.pdf?cite=1945%20c%2035%20§%2051); Rem. Supp. 1945 § 9998-189; [1943 c 127 § 8](https://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1943c127.pdf?cite=1943%20c%20127%20§%208); [1939 c 214 § 9](https://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1939c214.pdf?cite=1939%20c%20214%20§%209); [1937 c 162 § 11](https://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1937c162.pdf?cite=1937%20c%20162%20§%2011); \]

## 50.12.130 - Oaths and witnesses—Subpoenas—Application for court approval prior to issuance—No notice required.
1. In the discharge of the duties imposed by this title, the appeal tribunal and any duly authorized representative of the commissioner shall have power to administer oaths and affirmations, take depositions, certify to official acts and issue subpoenas to compel the attendance of witnesses and the production of books, papers, correspondence, memoranda, and other records deemed to be necessary as evidence in connection with any dispute or the administration of this title. It shall be unlawful for any person, without just cause, to fail to comply with subpoenas issued pursuant to the provisions of this section.

2. [Empty]

   a. Any authorized representative of the commissioner may apply for and obtain a superior court order approving and authorizing a subpoena in advance of its issuance. The application may be made in the county where the subpoenaed person resides or is found, or the county where the subpoenaed records or documents are located, or in Thurston county. The application must:

      i. State that an order is sought pursuant to this subsection;

      ii. Adequately specify the records, documents, or testimony; and

      iii. Declare under oath that an investigation is being conducted for a lawfully authorized purpose related to an investigation within the department's authority and that the subpoenaed documents or testimony are reasonably related to an investigation within the department's authority.

   b. Where the application under this subsection is made to the satisfaction of the court, the court must issue an order approving the subpoena. An order under this subsection constitutes authority of law for the agency to subpoena the records or testimony.

   c. Any authorized representative of the commissioner may seek approval and a court may issue an order under this subsection without prior notice to any person, including the person to whom the subpoena is directed and the person who is the subject of an investigation.

\[ [2010 c 22 § 3](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/2009-10/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/House/2789-S.SL.pdf?cite=2010%20c%2022%20§%203); [1945 c 35 § 52](https://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1945c35.pdf?cite=1945%20c%2035%20§%2052); Rem. Supp. 1945 § 9998-190; [1943 c 127 § 8](https://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1943c127.pdf?cite=1943%20c%20127%20§%208); [1941 c 253 § 8](https://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1941c253.pdf?cite=1941%20c%20253%20§%208); [1939 c 214 § 9](https://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1939c214.pdf?cite=1939%20c%20214%20§%209); [1937 c 162 § 11](https://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1937c162.pdf?cite=1937%20c%20162%20§%2011); \]

## 50.12.140 - Destruction of office records.
The commissioner may destroy any form, claim, ledger, check, letter, or other record of the employment security department at the expiration of three years after such record was originated by or filed with the employment security department, except that warrants and claims, claim determination, employer liability forms and contribution reports may be destroyed at the expiration of six years after such form is originated by or filed with the employment security department, and except that this section shall not apply to records pertaining to grants, accounts or expenditures for administration, records of the unemployment compensation fund and the unemployment compensation administration fund.

\[ [1947 c 215 § 11](https://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1947c215.pdf?cite=1947%20c%20215%20§%2011); [1945 c 35 § 53](https://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1945c35.pdf?cite=1945%20c%2035%20§%2053); Rem. Supp. 1947 § 99998-191; \]

## 50.12.150 - Representation by attorney general.
The attorney general shall be the general counsel of each and all divisions and departments under this title and it shall be his or her duty to institute and prosecute all actions and proceedings which may be necessary in the enforcement and carrying out of each, every, and all of the provisions of this title, and it shall be the duty of the attorney general to assign such assistants and attorneys as may be necessary to the exclusive duty of assisting each, every, and all divisions and departments created under this title in the enforcement of this title. The salaries of such assistants shall be paid out of the unemployment compensation administration fund, together with their expenses fixed by the attorney general and allowed by the treasurer of the unemployment compensation administration fund when approved upon vouchers by the attorney general.

\[ [2010 c 8 § 13017](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/2009-10/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/Senate/6239-S.SL.pdf?cite=2010%20c%208%20§%2013017); [1945 c 35 § 54](https://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1945c35.pdf?cite=1945%20c%2035%20§%2054); Rem. Supp. 1945 § 9998-192; [1937 c 162 § 17](https://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1937c162.pdf?cite=1937%20c%20162%20§%2017); \]

## 50.12.160 - Publication of title, rules and regulations, etc.
The commissioner may cause to be printed for distribution to the public the text of this title, the regulations and general rules, and other material which he or she deems relevant and suitable.

\[ [2010 c 8 § 13018](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/2009-10/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/Senate/6239-S.SL.pdf?cite=2010%20c%208%20§%2013018); [1977 c 75 § 76](https://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1977c75.pdf?cite=1977%20c%2075%20§%2076); [1945 c 35 § 55](https://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1945c35.pdf?cite=1945%20c%2035%20§%2055); Rem. Supp. 1945 § 9998-193; \]

## 50.12.170 - Services and fees of sheriffs.
The sheriff of any county, upon request of the commissioner or his or her duly authorized representative, or upon request of the attorney general, shall, for and on behalf of the commissioner, perform the functions of service, distraint, seizure, and sale, authority for which is granted to the commissioner or his or her duly authorized representative. No bond shall be required by the sheriff of any county for services rendered for the commissioner, his or her duly authorized representative, or the attorney general. The sheriff shall be allowed such fees as may be prescribed for like or similar official services.

\[ [2010 c 8 § 13019](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/2009-10/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/Senate/6239-S.SL.pdf?cite=2010%20c%208%20§%2013019); [1945 c 35 § 56](https://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1945c35.pdf?cite=1945%20c%2035%20§%2056); Rem. Supp. 1945 § 9998-194; \]

## 50.12.180 - State-federal cooperation.
The commissioner, through the Washington state employment service division, shall establish and maintain free public employment offices in such places as may be necessary for the proper administration of this title and for the purpose of performing such duties as are within the purview of the act of congress entitled "An Act to provide for the establishment of a national employment system and for other purposes," approved June 6, 1933 (48 Stat. 113; U.S.C. Title 29, Sec. 49(c), as amended).

In the administration of this title the commissioner shall cooperate to the fullest extent consistent with the provisions of this title, with any official or agency of the United States having powers or duties under the provisions of the said act of congress, as amended, and to do and perform all things necessary to secure to this state the benefits of the said act of congress, as amended, in the promotion and maintenance of a system of public employment offices. The provisions of the said act of congress, as amended, are hereby accepted by this state, in conformity with section 4 of said act and there shall be observance of and compliance with the requirements thereof. The commissioner may cooperate with or enter into agreements with the railroad retirement board with respect to the establishment, maintenance, and use of free employment service facilities, and make available to said board the state's records relating to the administration of this title, and furnish such copies thereof, at the expense of the board, as it may deem necessary for its purposes.

The commissioner shall comply with such provisions as the social security board, created by the social security act, approved August 14, 1935, as amended, may from time to time require, regarding reports and the correctness and verification thereof, and shall comply with the regulations of the social security board governing the expenditures of such sums as may be allotted and paid to this state under Title III of the social security act for the purpose of assisting the administration of this title. The commissioner may afford reasonable cooperation with every agency of the United States charged with the administration of any unemployment insurance law.

The governor is authorized to apply for an advance to the state unemployment fund and to accept the responsibility for the repayment of such advance in accordance with the conditions specified in Title XII of the social security act, as amended, in order to secure to this state and its citizens the advantages available under the provisions of such title.

The commissioner is also authorized and empowered to take such steps, not inconsistent with law, as may be necessary for the purpose of procuring for the people of this state all of the benefits and assistance, financial and otherwise, provided, or to be provided for, by or pursuant to any act of congress.

Upon request therefor the commissioner shall furnish to any agency of the United States charged with the administration of public works or assistance through public employment, the name, address, ordinary occupation, and employment status of each recipient of benefits and such recipient's rights to further benefits under this title.

\[ [1973 1st ex.s. c 158 § 4](https://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1973ex1c158.pdf?cite=1973%201st%20ex.s.%20c%20158%20§%204); [1959 c 266 § 2](https://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1959c266.pdf?cite=1959%20c%20266%20§%202); [1945 c 35 § 57](https://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1945c35.pdf?cite=1945%20c%2035%20§%2057); Rem. Supp. 1945 § 9998-195; [1943 c 127 § 8](https://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1943c127.pdf?cite=1943%20c%20127%20§%208); [1941 c 253 § 8](https://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1941c253.pdf?cite=1941%20c%20253%20§%208); [1939 c 214 § 9](https://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1939c214.pdf?cite=1939%20c%20214%20§%209); [1937 c 162 § 11](https://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1937c162.pdf?cite=1937%20c%20162%20§%2011); \]

## 50.12.190 - Employment stabilization.
The commissioner shall take all appropriate steps to reduce and prevent unemployment; to encourage and assist in the adoption of practical methods of vocational training, retraining and vocational guidance; to investigate, recommend, advise, and assist in the establishment and operation by municipalities, counties, school districts, and the state, of reserves for public works to be used in times of business depression and unemployment; to promote the reemployment of unemployed workers throughout the state in every other way that may be feasible; and to these ends to carry and publish the results of investigations and research studies.

\[ [1945 c 35 § 58](https://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1945c35.pdf?cite=1945%20c%2035%20§%2058); Rem. Supp. 1945 § 9998-197; [1943 c 127 § 8](https://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1943c127.pdf?cite=1943%20c%20127%20§%208); [1941 c 253 § 8](https://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1941c253.pdf?cite=1941%20c%20253%20§%208); [1939 c 214 § 9](https://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1939c214.pdf?cite=1939%20c%20214%20§%209); [1937 c 162 § 11](https://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1937c162.pdf?cite=1937%20c%20162%20§%2011); \]

## 50.12.200 - State advisory council—Committees and councils.
1. The commissioner shall appoint a state advisory council composed of not more than nine men and women, of which three shall be representatives of employers, three shall be representatives of employees, and three shall be representatives of the general public. Such council shall aid the commissioner in formulating policies and discussing problems related to the administration of this title and of assuring impartiality and freedom from political influence in the solution of such problems. The council shall serve without compensation. The commissioner may also appoint committees, and industrial or other special councils, to perform appropriate services. Advisory councilmembers shall be reimbursed for travel expenses incurred in accordance with RCW 43.03.050 and 43.03.060 as now existing or hereafter amended.

2. Beginning in 2021 and ending in 2030, the commissioner shall annually report to the state advisory council the amount of benefits that were not charged to employers as a direct consequence of RCW 50.29.021(3)(a)(viii).

\[ [2020 c 86 § 1](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/2019-20/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/House/2613-S.SL.pdf?cite=2020%20c%2086%20§%201); [1982 1st ex.s. c 18 § 1](https://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1982ex1c18.pdf?cite=1982%201st%20ex.s.%20c%2018%20§%201); 1975-'76 2nd ex.s. c 34 § 149; [1953 ex.s. c 8 § 4](https://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1953ex1c8.pdf?cite=1953%20ex.s.%20c%208%20§%204); [1947 c 215 § 12](https://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1947c215.pdf?cite=1947%20c%20215%20§%2012); [1945 c 35 § 59](https://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1945c35.pdf?cite=1945%20c%2035%20§%2059); Rem. Supp. 1947 § 9998-197; [1941 c 253 § 17](https://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1941c253.pdf?cite=1941%20c%20253%20§%2017); \]

## 50.12.210 - Employment services for persons with disabilities—Report to legislative committees.
It is the policy of the state of Washington that persons with disabilities shall be given equal opportunities in employment. The legislature recognizes that persons with disabilities have faced unfair discrimination in employment.

For these reasons, the state employment service division of the employment security department shall give particular and special attention service to those persons with disabilities which substantially limit one or more of their major life functions as defined under P.L. 93-112 and rules promulgated thereunder. Particular and special attention service shall include but not be limited to particular and special attention in counseling, referral, notification of job listings in advance of other persons, and other services of the employment service division.

Nothing in this section shall be construed so as to affect the veteran's preference or any other requirement of the United States department of labor.

The employment security department shall report to the house and senate commerce and labor committees by December 1, 1987, on its accomplishments under this section and on its future plans for implementation of this section. The department shall report to the above mentioned committees every odd-numbered year thereafter on its actions under this section.

The employment security department shall establish rules to implement this section.

\[ [2020 c 274 § 42](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/2019-20/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/House/2390.SL.pdf?cite=2020%20c%20274%20§%2042); [1987 c 76 § 1](https://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1987c76.pdf?cite=1987%20c%2076%20§%201); [1977 ex.s. c 273 § 1](https://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1977ex1c273.pdf?cite=1977%20ex.s.%20c%20273%20§%201); \]

## 50.12.220 - Penalties for late reports or contributions—Warning—Assessment—Waiver—Appeal. (Effective until October 1, 2021.)
1. If an employer fails to file a timely report as required by RCW 50.12.070, or the rules adopted pursuant thereto, the employer is subject to a penalty of twenty-five dollars per violation, unless the penalty is waived by the commissioner.

2. An employer who files an incomplete or incorrectly formatted tax and wage report as required by RCW 50.12.070 must receive a warning letter for the first occurrence. The warning letter will provide instructions for accurate reporting or notify the employer how to obtain technical assistance from the department. Except as provided in subsections (3) and (4) of this section, for subsequent occurrences within five years of the last occurrence, the employer is subject to a penalty as follows:

   a. When no contributions are due: For the second occurrence, the penalty is seventy-five dollars; for the third occurrence, the penalty is one hundred fifty dollars; and for the fourth occurrence and for each occurrence thereafter, the penalty is two hundred fifty dollars.

   b. When contributions are due: For the second occurrence, the penalty is ten percent of the quarterly contributions due, but not less than seventy-five dollars and not more than two hundred fifty dollars; for the third occurrence, the penalty is ten percent of the quarterly contributions due, but not less than one hundred fifty dollars and not more than two hundred fifty dollars; and for the fourth occurrence and each occurrence thereafter, the penalty is two hundred fifty dollars.

3. If an employer knowingly misrepresents to the employment security department the amount of his or her payroll upon which contributions under this title are based, the employer shall be liable to the state for up to ten times the amount of the difference in contributions paid, if any, and the amount the employer should have paid and for the reasonable expenses of auditing his or her books and collecting such sums. Such liability may be enforced in the name of the department.

4. If contributions are not paid on the date on which they are due and payable as prescribed by the commissioner, there shall be assessed a penalty of five percent of the amount of the contributions for the first month or part thereof of delinquency; there shall be assessed a total penalty of ten percent of the amount of the contributions for the second month or part thereof of delinquency; and there shall be assessed a total penalty of twenty percent of the amount of the contributions for the third month or part thereof of delinquency. No penalty so added shall be less than ten dollars. These penalties are in addition to the interest charges assessed under RCW 50.24.040.

5. Penalties shall not accrue on contributions from an estate in the hands of a receiver, executor, administrator, trustee in bankruptcy, common law assignee, or other liquidating officer subsequent to the date when such receiver, executor, administrator, trustee in bankruptcy, common law assignee, or other liquidating officer qualifies as such, but contributions accruing with respect to employment of persons by a receiver, executor, administrator, trustee in bankruptcy, common law assignee, or other liquidating officer shall become due and shall be subject to penalties in the same manner as contributions due from other employers.

6. Where adequate information has been furnished to the department and the department has failed to act or has advised the employer of no liability or inability to decide the issue, penalties shall be waived by the commissioner. Penalties may also be waived for good cause if the commissioner determines that the failure to file timely, complete, and correctly formatted reports or pay timely contributions was not due to the employer's fault.

7. Any decision to assess a penalty as provided by this section shall be made by the chief administrative officer of the tax branch or his or her designee.

8. Nothing in this section shall be construed to deny an employer the right to appeal the assessment of any penalty. Such appeal shall be made in the manner provided in RCW 50.32.030.

\[ [2007 c 146 § 3](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/2007-08/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/Senate/5373-S.SL.pdf?cite=2007%20c%20146%20§%203); [2006 c 47 § 3](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/2005-06/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/Senate/6359-S.SL.pdf?cite=2006%20c%2047%20§%203); [2004 c 97 § 1](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/2003-04/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/House/2510-S.SL.pdf?cite=2004%20c%2097%20§%201); [2003 2nd sp.s. c 4 § 22](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/2003-04/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/Senate/6097.SL.pdf?cite=2003%202nd%20sp.s.%20c%204%20§%2022); [1987 c 111 § 2](https://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1987c111.pdf?cite=1987%20c%20111%20§%202); [1979 ex.s. c 190 § 1](https://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1979ex1c190.pdf?cite=1979%20ex.s.%20c%20190%20§%201); \]

## 50.12.230 - Job skills training program—Department's duties.
See RCW 28C.04.400 through 28C.04.420.

\[ \]

## 50.12.235 - Washington conservation corps—Department's duties.
See chapter 43.220 RCW.

\[ \]

## 50.12.240 - On-the-job training—Employer qualifications established by rule.
The commissioner may establish by rule qualifications for employers who agree to provide on-the-job training for new employees.

\[ [1985 c 299 § 2](https://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1985c299.pdf?cite=1985%20c%20299%20§%202); \]

## 50.12.245 - Cooperation with workforce training and education coordinating board.
The commissioner shall cooperate with the workforce training and education coordinating board in the conduct of the board's responsibilities under RCW 28C.18.060 and shall provide information and data in a format that is accessible to the board.

\[ [1991 c 238 § 80](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/1991-92/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/Senate/5184-S.SL.pdf?cite=1991%20c%20238%20§%2080); \]

## 50.12.250 - Information clearinghouse to assist in employment of persons of disability.
The employment security department shall establish an information clearinghouse for use by persons of disability and governmental and private employers. The services of the clearinghouse shall include:

1. Provision of information on private and state services available to assist persons of disability in their training and employment needs;

2. Provision of information on private, state, and federal incentive programs and services available to employers of persons of disability; and

3. Publication of a comprehensive list of programs and services in subsections (1) and (2) of this section.

\[ [1987 c 369 § 2](https://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1987c369.pdf?cite=1987%20c%20369%20§%202); \]

## 50.12.252 - Information clearinghouse—Consultation on establishment.
In establishing the information clearinghouse, the employment security department shall consult with organizations of private sector employers and persons of disability.

\[ [1987 c 369 § 3](https://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1987c369.pdf?cite=1987%20c%20369%20§%203); \]

## 50.12.290 - Printed materials—Department's duties.
When an employer initially files a business license application under chapter 19.02 RCW for the purpose, in whole or in part, of registering to pay unemployment insurance taxes, the employment security department must send to the employer any printed material the department recommends or requires the employer to post. Any time the printed material has substantive changes in the information, the department must send a copy to each employer.

\[ [2013 c 144 § 41](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/2013-14/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/House/1568-S.SL.pdf?cite=2013%20c%20144%20§%2041); [2007 c 287 § 1](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/2007-08/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/Senate/5915-S.SL.pdf?cite=2007%20c%20287%20§%201); \]

## 50.12.300 - Professional employer organizations—Reports and records.
1. A professional employer organization must register with the department and ensure that its client employers are registered with the department as provided in RCW 50.12.070.

2. By September 1, 2007, the professional employer organization shall provide the department with:

   a. The names, addresses, unified business identifier numbers, and employment security account numbers of all its existing client employers who do business or have covered employees in Washington state. This requirement applies whether or not the client employer currently has covered employees performing services in Washington state;

   b. The names and social security numbers of corporate officers, owners, or limited liability company members of client employers; and

   c. The business location in Washington state where payroll records of its client employers will be made available for review or inspection upon request of the department.

3. For client employers registering for the first time as required in RCW 50.12.070, the professional employer organization must:

   a. Provide the names, addresses, unified business identifier numbers, and employment security account numbers of the client employers who do business or have covered employees in Washington state. This requirement applies whether or not the client employer currently has covered employees performing services in Washington state;

   b. Provide the names and social security numbers of corporate officers, owners, or limited liability company members of the client employers; and

   c. Provide the business location in Washington state where payroll records of its client employers will be made available for review or inspection at the time of registration or upon request of the department.

4. The professional employer organization must notify the department within thirty days each time it adds or terminates a relationship with a client employer. Notification must take place on forms provided by the department. The notification must include the name, employment security account number, unified business identifier number, and address of the client employer, as well as the effective date the relationship began or terminated.

5. The professional employer organization must provide a power of attorney, confidential information authorization, or other evidence, completed by each client employer as required by the department, authorizing it to act on behalf of the client employer for unemployment insurance purposes.

6. The professional employer organization must file quarterly wage and contribution reports with the department. The professional employer organization may file either a single electronic report containing separate and distinct information for each client employer and using the employer account number and tax rate assigned to each client employer by the department, or separate paper reports for each client employer.

7. The professional employer organization must maintain accurate payroll records for each client employer and make these records available for review or inspection upon request of the department at the location provided by the professional employer organization.

\[ [2007 c 146 § 9](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/2007-08/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/Senate/5373-S.SL.pdf?cite=2007%20c%20146%20§%209); \]

## 50.12.310 - Professional employer organizations—Revocation of authority to act as coemployer.
A professional employer organization's authority to act as a coemployer for purposes of this title may be revoked by the department when it determines that the professional employer organization has substantially failed to comply with the requirements of RCW 50.12.300.

\[ [2007 c 146 § 12](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/2007-08/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/Senate/5373-S.SL.pdf?cite=2007%20c%20146%20§%2012); \]

## 50.12.320 - Labor market research—High-demand green industries—Middle or high-wage occupations.
The employment security department, in consultation with the *department, the workforce board, and the **leadership team must take the following actions:

1. Conduct and update labor market research on a biennial basis to analyze the current public and private labor market and projected job growth in the green economy, the current and projected recruitment and skill requirement of public and private green economy employers, the wage and benefits ranges of jobs within green economy industries, and the education and training requirements of entry-level and incumbent workers in those industries;

2. Propose which industries will be considered high-demand green industries, based on current and projected job creation and their strategic importance to the development of the state's green economy; and

3. Define which family-sustaining wage and benefits ranges within green economy industries will be considered middle or high-wage occupations and occupations that are part of career pathways to the same.

\[ [2009 c 536 § 11](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/2009-10/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/House/2227-S2.SL.pdf?cite=2009%20c%20536%20§%2011); \]

## 50.12.330 - Domestic violence employment poster.
1. The department shall create an employment poster regarding domestic violence. The poster shall include space in which an employer shall provide the name or names of community resources regarding domestic violence. The employer shall post the poster and keep it posted in a conspicuous place where other required employment posters are posted. The department shall make the poster available on its website and may make the poster available in other formats.

2. This section does not create any liability for any person or entity for any acts or omissions.

\[ [2019 c 228 § 2](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/2019-20/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/House/1533.SL.pdf?cite=2019%20c%20228%20§%202); \]

## 50.12.340 - Report to legislature. (Effective October 1, 2021.)
By November 1, 2026, the employment security department, in coordination with the workforce training and education coordinating board, shall report to the appropriate committees of the legislature and the governor on how the standard occupational classification or job title data required to be reported under RCW 50.12.070 has been used to evaluate educational investments, add new or modify existing training programs, or improve worksource job placement results.

\[ [2020 c 334 § 4](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/2019-20/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/House/2308-S.SL.pdf?cite=2020%20c%20334%20§%204); \]

## 50.12.350 - Use of social security numbers in correspondence with third parties.
1. For the purposes of preventing fraud and protecting personal privacy, the employment security department shall examine its current practices in which it discloses the full social security numbers of persons in its correspondence with nongovernmental third parties.

2. If the disclosure of full social security numbers in its correspondence with nongovernmental third parties is not required by any state or federal law, the employment security department shall:

   a. Institute procedures to replace the use of full social security numbers with other forms of personal identifiers in its correspondence with nongovernmental third parties; and

   b. By July 1, 2023, cease disclosing the full social security numbers of persons in its correspondence with nongovernmental third parties.

3. The definitions in this subsection apply throughout this section:

   a. "Correspondence" means letters, emails, or other similar communications. "Correspondence" does not include financial transactions or communications sent via secured or encrypted methods.

   b. "Nongovernmental third party" means an individual, corporation, business trust, estate, trust, partnership, association, joint venture, or other legal commercial entity. The term does not include a government or governmental subdivision, agency, instrumentality, or private persons or organizations covered by RCW 50.13.080.

\[ [2021 c 80 § 2](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/2021-22/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/House/1455-S.SL.pdf?cite=2021%20c%2080%20§%202); \]

## 50.12.355 - Report—Unemployment trust fund—Minimum weekly benefit increase—Wages subject to tax. (Expires January 31, 2026.)
1. By December 1, 2021, and annually thereafter until December 1, 2025, and in compliance with RCW 43.01.036, the department must report to the governor and the appropriate committees of the legislature on the following:

   a. Status of the unemployment trust fund, including any federal advances required for trust fund solvency;

   b. An analysis of the impact of the minimum weekly benefit amount increase, including comparing wages earned and benefits claimed for those individuals receiving the minimum weekly benefit amount and the average claim duration for those individuals.

2. By December 1, 2021, and in compliance with RCW 43.01.036, the department must report to the governor and the appropriate committees of the legislature a review of the amount of wages subject to tax. This review shall include an analysis of the equitable treatment of employers based on the amount of wages subject to tax, including a comparison of the percentage of wages subject to tax for small, medium, and large businesses and examples of how changes to the amount of wages subject to tax would impact trust fund balances and employer contributions.

3. The department must use an existing unemployment insurance advisory committee comprising of members of business and members of labor to consult in the development of this report, including any evidentiary assumptions underlying the report. The report must be specifically discussed in a minimum of two meetings of the committee each year prior to submitting the report. The report must also include a section for committee members to respond directly to the contents of the report.

4. This section expires January 31, 2026.

\[ [2021 c 2 § 6](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/2021-22/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/Senate/5061-S.SL.pdf?cite=2021%20c%202%20§%206); \]

## 50.12.360 - Unemployment insurance claim adjudicator training program—Report.
1. The employment security department must create a training program to prepare a reserve force of skilled unemployment insurance claim adjudicators who can be available quickly when claims volume demands.

2. The program must:

   a. Be open to both state and other public employees and private citizens;

   b. Be of sufficient quality that persons completing the training and any required continuing education would be ready to work as an unemployment insurance claim adjudicator within one week of commencing employment with the employment security department; and

   c. Provide a certification of completion to participants who complete the program.

3. The office of financial management must collaborate with the employment security department to assist the department in identifying agencies with current state employees who meet the minimum qualifications for unemployment insurance claims' adjudicator. Employees at other agencies, who meet the minimum qualifications of the unemployment insurance claims' adjudicator classification, may, upon approval of their agency, attend required training provided by the department. In designated times of high unemployment claims, current state employees who have completed required training and who are otherwise qualified may be selected to assist the department in processing unemployment insurance claims or related activities. The office of financial management may adopt rules or issue guidance to assist in the implementation of this provision.

4. By October 1, 2021, and each year thereafter, the employment security department must provide a report to the house of representatives committee on labor and workplace standards and the senate committee on labor, commerce, and tribal affairs, or successor committees, on the number of persons with current certifications under subsection (2)(c) of this section, the number of people employed by the department and over what period of time, and the adjudicator training and hiring costs.

\[ [2021 c 271 § 2](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/2021-22/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/Senate/5193-S.SL.pdf?cite=2021%20c%20271%20§%202); \]

## 50.12.365 - Plain language required for letters, alerts, and notices.
1. The department must designate department employees to assure that letters, alerts, and notices produced manually or by the department's unemployment insurance technology system are written in plainly understood language and tested on claimants before they are approved for use. Criteria for approval must include comprehensibility, clarity, and readability. If the messaging of any letter, alert, or notice falls short of those criteria, manual methods of producing a comprehensible version shall be considered while the department waits for their unemployment insurance technology system to incorporate required modifications.

2. Determinations and redeterminations must clearly convey applicable statute numbers, a brief explanation of pertinent law, outline of relevant facts, reasoning, decision, and result.

3. The department will work with an unemployment insurance advisory committee comprised of business and worker advocates to explore:

   a. Establishing thresholds that will trigger automatic adjustments in department staffing assignments and phone agent staffing levels;

   b. Establishing a pilot to provide a caseworker approach to the claims of a group of claimants with that casework carrying over to reemployment services;

   c. Increasing language access, including by providing translation of notices sent to claimants as part of their unemployment insurance claims; and

   d. Frequency of the initial and continuing training to meet the needs of RCW 50.12.360.

4. Dedicated toll-free phone lines must be established for claimants who lack computer skills or access to computers, claimants with disabilities, and claimants with limited English proficiency.

\[ [2021 c 271 § 3](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/2021-22/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/Senate/5193-S.SL.pdf?cite=2021%20c%20271%20§%203); \]

## 50.12.370 - Unemployment insurance claims—Online data dashboard—Quarterly reports, performance metrics.
The department must:

1. Maintain an online data dashboard;

2. Provide quarterly reports with performance metrics that include:

   a. Updates of unemployment rates;

   b. Total numbers of claims paid, amount compensated, claims denied, claims pending in adjudication, claims on which payment has been halted for review, pending appeals, appeals redetermined by the department, and appeals sent to the office of administrative hearings;

   c. Claims center phone statistics including call volume, hold times, abandoned calls, repeat calls, and all-circuits-busy messages for both claimants and employers;

   d. Ratio of staff phone agents to employers and ratio of staff phone agents to claimants;

   e. Number and dollar total of overpayments imposed and overpayment waiver approval rate; and

   f. The percentage of unemployed persons in the state receiving benefits (recipiency rate).

\[ [2021 c 271 § 4](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/2021-22/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/Senate/5193-S.SL.pdf?cite=2021%20c%20271%20§%204); \]

