# 50.98 - Construction.
* [50.98.010 - Saving clause—1945 c 35.](#5098010---saving-clause1945-c-35)
* [50.98.020 - Appointments and regulations continued.](#5098020---appointments-and-regulations-continued)
* [50.98.030 - Actions commenced under prior laws.](#5098030---actions-commenced-under-prior-laws)
* [50.98.040 - Acts repealed.](#5098040---acts-repealed)
* [50.98.050 - Conflicting acts repealed.](#5098050---conflicting-acts-repealed)
* [50.98.060 - Repealed acts not reenacted.](#5098060---repealed-acts-not-reenacted)
* [50.98.070 - Separability of provisions—1945 c 35.](#5098070---separability-of-provisions1945-c-35)
* [50.98.100 - Base year wages to include remuneration paid for previously uncovered services.](#5098100---base-year-wages-to-include-remuneration-paid-for-previously-uncovered-services)
* [50.98.110 - Compliance with federal unemployment tax act—Internal references—Interpretation.](#5098110---compliance-with-federal-unemployment-tax-actinternal-referencesinterpretation)
## 50.98.010 - Saving clause—1945 c 35.
If any provisions of this act, or the application thereof to any person or circumstances, is held invalid, the remainder of the act and the application of such provision to other persons or circumstances shall not be affected thereby.

\[ [1945 c 35 § 184](http://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1945c35.pdf?cite=1945%20c%2035%20§%20184); no RRS; \]

## 50.98.020 - Appointments and regulations continued.
The repeal of any acts or parts of acts by this act shall not affect the appointment or employment of any individual or salary, wages, compensation, powers or duties relating to such individual which would continue in effect except for such repeal. Rules and regulations adopted pursuant to the provisions of any acts or parts of acts repealed by this act consistent with the provisions of this act are not affected by such repeal and are hereby continued in full force and effect.

\[ [1945 c 35 § 185](http://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1945c35.pdf?cite=1945%20c%2035%20§%20185); no RRS; \]

## 50.98.030 - Actions commenced under prior laws.
Any action or proceeding had or commenced in any civil or criminal cause prior to the effective date of this act may be prosecuted and continued with the same effect and under the same provisions of the law in effect at the time the action or proceeding was had or commenced: PROVIDED, That no appeal taken subsequent to the effective date of this act will be effective or valid unless there is compliance with the requirements of this act relating to appeals.

\[ [1945 c 35 § 186](http://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1945c35.pdf?cite=1945%20c%2035%20§%20186); no RRS; \]

## 50.98.040 - Acts repealed.
The following acts and parts of acts relating to unemployment compensation are hereby repealed: Chapter 162, Session Laws of 1937; chapter 12, Session Laws of 1939; chapter 214, Session Laws of 1939; section 6 of chapter 201, Session Laws of 1941; chapter 253, Session Laws of 1941; chapter 65, Session Laws of 1943; chapter 127, Session Laws of 1943; chapter 226, Session Laws of 1943.

\[ [1945 c 35 § 188](http://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1945c35.pdf?cite=1945%20c%2035%20§%20188); no RRS; \]

## 50.98.050 - Conflicting acts repealed.
All acts or parts of acts in conflict with or in derogation of this act or any part of this act are hereby repealed insofar as the same are in conflict with or in derogation of this act or any part thereof.

\[ [1945 c 35 § 189](http://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1945c35.pdf?cite=1945%20c%2035%20§%20189); no RRS; \]

## 50.98.060 - Repealed acts not reenacted.
The repeal of any acts or parts of acts hereby shall not be construed to reenact or revive any act or parts of acts repealed or superseded by the acts or parts of acts hereby repealed.

\[ [1945 c 35 § 190](http://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1945c35.pdf?cite=1945%20c%2035%20§%20190); no RRS; \]

## 50.98.070 - Separability of provisions—1945 c 35.
If any section, sentence, clause or phrase of this act should be held to be invalid or unconstitutional the invalidity or unconstitutionality thereof shall not affect the validity or constitutionality of any other section, sentence, clause or phrase of this act.

\[ [1945 c 35 § 191](http://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1945c35.pdf?cite=1945%20c%2035%20§%20191); no RRS; \]

## 50.98.100 - Base year wages to include remuneration paid for previously uncovered services.
1. Effective with benefit years beginning on and after January 1, 1978, base year wages shall include remuneration paid for previously uncovered services: PROVIDED, That the maximum benefits payable to an individual as computed for the benefit year will be reduced to the extent that benefits were paid on the basis of identical calendar quarters of the previously uncovered services with respect to a claim filed by the individual under Title II of the Emergency Jobs and Unemployment Assistance Act of 1974. Benefits will be paid, subject to the provisions of this title, based upon the previously uncovered services to the extent that the unemployment compensation trust fund will be reimbursed for the cost thereof by the federal government under section 121 of PL 94-566 and regulations published by the secretary of labor relating thereto.

2. For the purposes of this section, the term "previously uncovered services" means services performed before January 1, 1978, which are not employment as defined in Title 50 RCW at any time during the one year period ending December 31, 1975, and which:

   a. Is agricultural labor as defined in RCW 50.04.150 and covered by RCW 50.04.155 or domestic services as defined in and covered by RCW 50.04.160; or

   b. Is service performed by an employee of this state or a political subdivision of this state newly covered by chapter 292, Laws of 1977 ex. sess. or by an employee of a nonprofit educational institution which is not an institution of higher education as provided in *RCW 50.44.040(3).

3. Any nonprofit organization or governmental entity electing to make payments in lieu of contributions shall not be liable to make payments with respect to benefits paid any individual whose base year wages include wages for previously uncovered services as defined in subsection (2)(a) and (b) of this section to the extent that the unemployment compensation fund is reimbursed for the benefits under section 121 of PL 94-566.

4. Benefits paid any individual whose base year wages include wages for previously uncovered services as defined in subsection (2)(a) and (b) of this section shall not be charged to the experience rating account of any contribution paying employer to the extent that the unemployment compensation fund is reimbursed for the benefits under section 121 of PL 94-566.

\[ [1977 ex.s. c 292 § 20](http://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1977ex1c292.pdf?cite=1977%20ex.s.%20c%20292%20§%2020); \]

## 50.98.110 - Compliance with federal unemployment tax act—Internal references—Interpretation.
Chapter 292, Laws of 1977 ex. sess. has been enacted to meet the requirements imposed by the federal unemployment tax act as amended by PL 94-566. Internal references in any section of chapter 292, Laws of 1977 ex. sess. to the provisions of that act are intended only to apply to those provisions as they existed as of *the effective date of chapter 292, Laws of 1977 ex. sess.

In view of the importance of compliance of chapter 292, Laws of 1977 ex. sess. with the federal unemployment tax act, any ambiguities contained herein should be resolved in a manner consistent with the provisions of that act. Considerable weight has been given to the commentary contained in that document entitled "Draft Language and Commentary to Implement the Unemployment Compensation Amendments of 1976 PL 94-566", published by the United States department of labor, employment and training administration, and that commentary should be referred to when interpreting the provisions of chapter 292, Laws of 1977 ex. sess.

\[ [1977 ex.s. c 292 § 21](http://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1977ex1c292.pdf?cite=1977%20ex.s.%20c%20292%20§%2021); \]

