# 86.18 - Flood control contributions.
* [86.18.010 - Declaration of purpose.](#8618010---declaration-of-purpose)
* [86.18.030 - Conditions and limitations on expenditures and contributions from appropriations—Warrants.](#8618030---conditions-and-limitations-on-expenditures-and-contributions-from-appropriationswarrants)
* [86.18.900 - Construction—1967 ex.s. c 136.](#8618900---construction1967-exs-c-136)
## 86.18.010 - Declaration of purpose.
Economic development and growth of the state is dependent on the control of flood waters. The legislature declares, in the exercise of its sovereign and police powers, that the purpose of this chapter is to provide for contributions of funds for assisting political subdivisions of the state in the protection of lands from inundation; the protection of public highways; the control of storm drainage; the maintenance of stream channels and water courses; and the protection of life and property.

It is the intent of the legislature that funds be provided to political subdivisions of the state to assist in the development of those flood control improvements and projects, which cannot be reasonably and practicably financed through the normal methods of financing available to such political subdivisions.

\[ [1967 ex.s. c 136 § 1](http://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1967ex1c136.pdf?cite=1967%20ex.s.%20c%20136%20§%201); \]

## 86.18.030 - Conditions and limitations on expenditures and contributions from appropriations—Warrants.
Funds shall be expended and contributions made to a political subdivision of the state from flood control appropriations only after:

1. The project for which the funds are to be used has been approved by the department of ecology in accordance with the regulatory provisions of chapter 86.16 RCW.

2. Engineering studies and plans have been made and filed with the county engineer of the county in which the project is located, or the county engineers of all counties in which the project is located, if it is located in more than one county.

3. The estimate of cost of acquisition of necessary lands, rights-of-way and construction of the project or improvements, together with adequate supporting data have been completed and filed with the department of ecology.

4. A comprehensive plan for the area involved has been completed and filed with the department.

5. The political subdivision desiring a contribution has made an application for a contribution to the department showing the estimated cost of the project and the requested contribution.

6. Federal funds are available for contribution for payment of a portion of the cost of the project.

The director of ecology is authorized to determine when these conditions have been met and to request the proper warrant for the state's contribution. Contributions to a political subdivision for a specific project shall not exceed fifty percent of the cost of acquisition of necessary lands and rights-of-way, and construction of the project or works of improvement.

\[ [1987 c 109 § 63](http://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1987c109.pdf?cite=1987%20c%20109%20§%2063); [1980 c 32 § 12](http://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1980c32.pdf?cite=1980%20c%2032%20§%2012); [1967 ex.s. c 136 § 3](http://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1967ex1c136.pdf?cite=1967%20ex.s.%20c%20136%20§%203); \]

## 86.18.900 - Construction—1967 ex.s. c 136.
This legislative proposal shall be complete authority for the accomplishment of purposes hereby authorized, and shall be liberally construed to accomplish its purposes.

\[ [1967 ex.s. c 136 § 4](http://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1967ex1c136.pdf?cite=1967%20ex.s.%20c%20136%20§%204); \]

