# 86.24 - Flood control by state in cooperation with federal agencies, etc.
* [86.24.010 - Declaration of policy.](#8624010---declaration-of-policy)
* [86.24.020 - Cooperation authorized.](#8624020---cooperation-authorized)
* [86.24.030 - Contracts authorized—Extent of participation.](#8624030---contracts-authorizedextent-of-participation)
* [86.24.040 - Contracts between flood control districts and other governmental units.](#8624040---contracts-between-flood-control-districts-and-other-governmental-units)
* [86.24.050 - State participation where state interest affected.](#8624050---state-participation-where-state-interest-affected)
## 86.24.010 - Declaration of policy.
It is the purpose of the state of Washington, in the exercise of its sovereign and police powers, and in the interests of public welfare, to establish a state policy for the control of floods to the extent practicable and by economically feasible methods.

\[ [1935 c 163 § 1](http://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1935c163.pdf?cite=1935%20c%20163%20§%201); RRS § 9662-1; \]

## 86.24.020 - Cooperation authorized.
The department of ecology, in cooperation with the corps of engineers of the United States army, and any other agencies of the United States, and in cooperation with any official, agency or institution of the state and any flood control district created under the laws of the state, and any county, or any counties acting jointly pursuant to RCW 86.13.010 through 86.13.090, shall act for the state in the formulation of plans for the control of floods in the several flood areas of the state, and shall consider the extent to which the state should participate therein with the United States and/or any flood control district, or county, or counties so acting jointly. In case of federal participation, the plan of development and the surveys, plans and specifications for such flood control projects shall be in accordance with the federal requirements therefor.

\[ [1987 c 109 § 64](http://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1987c109.pdf?cite=1987%20c%20109%20§%2064); [1935 c 163 § 2](http://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1935c163.pdf?cite=1935%20c%20163%20§%202); RRS § 9662-2; \]

## 86.24.030 - Contracts authorized—Extent of participation.
The state director of ecology, when state funds shall be available therefor, shall have authority on behalf of the state to enter into contracts with the United States or any agency thereof and/or with any such flood control district, county, or counties so acting jointly, for flood control purposes for any such flood control district, county, or counties so acting jointly, the amount of the state's participation in any such contract to be such sum as may be appropriated therefor, or, in event of unallocated state appropriations for flood control purposes, in such necessary sum as to any such contract as he or she shall determine.

\[ [2013 c 23 § 479](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/2013-14/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/Senate/5077-S.SL.pdf?cite=2013%20c%2023%20§%20479); [1988 c 127 § 39](http://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1988c127.pdf?cite=1988%20c%20127%20§%2039); [1935 c 163 § 4](http://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1935c163.pdf?cite=1935%20c%20163%20§%204); RRS § 9662-4; \]

## 86.24.040 - Contracts between flood control districts and other governmental units.
In any case where the boundaries of any flood control district shall embrace all or any part of any county, city, town, diking, or drainage district, subject to flood conditions, the governing authorities thereof may contract with the directors of such flood control district, with the written approval of the state director, for the maintenance, repair, renewal and extension of any existing flood control works of such county, city, town, diking, or drainage district, situated within the flood control district, and for the construction and maintenance of specific flood control projects, for such term of years and for the payment to such flood control district therefor of such annual sums as in said contract specified.

\[ [1979 ex.s. c 30 § 19](http://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1979ex1c30.pdf?cite=1979%20ex.s.%20c%2030%20§%2019); [1935 c 163 § 6](http://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1935c163.pdf?cite=1935%20c%20163%20§%206); RRS § 9662-6; \]

## 86.24.050 - State participation where state interest affected.
State participation in flood control projects shall be in such as are affected with a state interest and to such extent as the legislature may determine.

\[ [1935 c 163 § 3](http://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1935c163.pdf?cite=1935%20c%20163%20§%203); RRS § 9662-3; \]

