# 48.49 - Balance billing protection act.
* [48.49.003 - Findings—Intent—2019 c 427.](#4849003---findingsintent2019-c-427)
* [48.49.005 - Short title.](#4849005---short-title)
* [48.49.010 - Definitions.](#4849010---definitions)
* [48.49.020 - Balance billing—When prohibited—Carrier's duty to hold an enrollee harmless from balance billing under certain circumstances.](#4849020---balance-billingwhen-prohibitedcarriers-duty-to-hold-an-enrollee-harmless-from-balance-billing-under-certain-circumstances)
* [48.49.030 - Enrollee's obligation to pay for services—When satisfied—Determination of commercially reasonable payment amount through good faith negotiation between carrier and out-of-network provider or facility—Carrier's duties.](#4849030---enrollees-obligation-to-pay-for-serviceswhen-satisfieddetermination-of-commercially-reasonable-payment-amount-through-good-faith-negotiation-between-carrier-and-out-of-network-provider-or-facilitycarriers-duties)
* [48.49.040 - Dispute resolution process—Determination of commercially reasonable payment amount.](#4849040---dispute-resolution-processdetermination-of-commercially-reasonable-payment-amount)
* [48.49.050 - Commissioner's annual report on dispute resolution information regarding arbitration over commercially reasonable payment amounts. (Expires January 1, 2024.)](#4849050---commissioners-annual-report-on-dispute-resolution-information-regarding-arbitration-over-commercially-reasonable-payment-amounts-expires-january-1-2024)
* [48.49.060 - Notice of consumer rights concerning balance billing protection—Development of standard template language by commissioner.](#4849060---notice-of-consumer-rights-concerning-balance-billing-protectiondevelopment-of-standard-template-language-by-commissioner)
* [48.49.070 - Hospital or ambulatory surgical facility—Requirement to provide certain information on website or upon consumer request—Requirement to provide carriers with nonemployed provider lists.](#4849070---hospital-or-ambulatory-surgical-facilityrequirement-to-provide-certain-information-on-website-or-upon-consumer-requestrequirement-to-provide-carriers-with-nonemployed-provider-lists)
* [48.49.080 - Health care provider—Requirement to provide certain information on website or upon consumer request—Requirement to submit network status information to carriers.](#4849080---health-care-providerrequirement-to-provide-certain-information-on-website-or-upon-consumer-requestrequirement-to-submit-network-status-information-to-carriers)
* [48.49.090 - Carrier—Requirement to update website and provider directory—Requirement to provide enrollee with certain information.](#4849090---carrierrequirement-to-update-website-and-provider-directoryrequirement-to-provide-enrollee-with-certain-information)
* [48.49.100 - Pattern of unresolved violations—Enforcement action by department of health or appropriate disciplining authority.](#4849100---pattern-of-unresolved-violationsenforcement-action-by-department-of-health-or-appropriate-disciplining-authority)
* [48.49.110 - Rule-making authority.](#4849110---rule-making-authority)
* [48.49.120 - No application of chapter to health plans under chapter  74.09 RCW.](#4849120---no-application-of-chapter-to-health-plans-under-chapter--7409-rcw)
* [48.49.130 - Application of chapter to self-funded group health plans that elect to participate in balance billing protection provisions—Annual notice to commissioner.](#4849130---application-of-chapter-to-self-funded-group-health-plans-that-elect-to-participate-in-balance-billing-protection-provisionsannual-notice-to-commissioner)
* [48.49.140 - Liberal construction of chapter to promote public interest.](#4849140---liberal-construction-of-chapter-to-promote-public-interest)
* [48.49.150 - Determining the adequacy of provider networks—Required considerations.](#4849150---determining-the-adequacy-of-provider-networksrequired-considerations)
* [48.49.900 - Effective date—2019 c 427.](#4849900---effective-date2019-c-427)
## 48.49.003 - Findings—Intent—2019 c 427.
1. The legislature finds that:

    a. Consumers receive surprise bills or balance bills for services provided at out-of-network facilities or by out-of-network health care providers at in-network facilities;

    b. Consumers must not be placed in the middle of contractual disputes between providers and health insurance carriers; and

    c. Facilities, providers, and health insurance carriers all share responsibility to ensure consumers have transparent information on network providers and benefit coverage, and the insurance commissioner is responsible for ensuring that provider networks include sufficient numbers and types of contracted providers to reasonably ensure consumers have in-network access for covered benefits.

2. It is the intent of the legislature to:

    a. Ban balance billing of consumers enrolled in fully insured, regulated insurance plans and plans offered to public employees under chapter 41.05 RCW for the services described in RCW 48.49.020, and to provide self-funded group health plans with an option to elect to be subject to the provisions of chapter 427, Laws of 2019;

    b. Remove consumers from balance billing disputes and require that out-of-network providers and carriers negotiate out-of-network payments in good faith under the terms of chapter 427, Laws of 2019; and

    c. Provide an environment that encourages self-funded groups to negotiate out-of-network payments in good faith with providers and facilities in return for balance billing protections.

\[ [2019 c 427 § 1](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/2019-20/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/House/1065-S2.SL.pdf?cite=2019%20c%20427%20§%201); \]

## 48.49.005 - Short title.
This chapter may be known and cited as the balance billing protection act.

\[ [2019 c 427 § 4](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/2019-20/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/House/1065-S2.SL.pdf?cite=2019%20c%20427%20§%204); \]

## 48.49.010 - Definitions.
The definitions in RCW 48.43.005 apply throughout this chapter unless the context clearly requires otherwise.

\[ [2019 c 427 § 5](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/2019-20/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/House/1065-S2.SL.pdf?cite=2019%20c%20427%20§%205); \]

## 48.49.020 - Balance billing—When prohibited—Carrier's duty to hold an enrollee harmless from balance billing under certain circumstances.
1. An out-of-network provider or facility may not balance bill an enrollee for the following health care services:

    a. Emergency services provided to an enrollee; or

    b. Nonemergency health care services provided to an enrollee at an in-network hospital licensed under chapter 70.41 RCW or an in-network ambulatory surgical facility licensed under chapter 70.230 RCW if the services:

        i. Involve surgical or ancillary services; and

        ii. Are provided by an out-of-network provider.

2. Payment for services described in subsection (1) of this section is subject to the provisions of RCW 48.49.030 and 48.49.040.

3. [Empty]
    a. Except to the extent provided in (b) of this subsection, the carrier must hold an enrollee harmless from balance billing when emergency services described in subsection (1)(a) of this section are provided by an out-of-network hospital in a state that borders Washington state.

    b. [Empty]
        i. Upon the effective date of federal legislation prohibiting balance billing when emergency services described in subsection (1)(a) of this section are provided by a hospital, the carrier no longer has a duty to hold enrollees harmless from balance billing under (a) of this subsection; or

        ii. Upon the effective date of an interstate compact with a state bordering Washington state or enactment of legislation by a state bordering Washington state prohibiting balance billing when emergency services described in subsection (1)(a) of this section are provided by a hospital located in that border state to a Washington state resident, the carrier no longer has a duty to hold enrollees harmless from balance billing under (a) of this subsection for services provided by a hospital in that border state. The commissioner shall engage with border states on appropriate means to prohibit balance billing by out-of-state hospitals of Washington state residents.

4. This section applies to health care providers or facilities providing services to members of entities administering a self-funded group health plan and its plan members only if the entity has elected to participate in this section and RCW 48.49.030 and 48.49.040 as provided in RCW 48.49.130.

\[ [2019 c 427 § 6](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/2019-20/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/House/1065-S2.SL.pdf?cite=2019%20c%20427%20§%206); \]

## 48.49.030 - Enrollee's obligation to pay for services—When satisfied—Determination of commercially reasonable payment amount through good faith negotiation between carrier and out-of-network provider or facility—Carrier's duties.
1. If an enrollee receives emergency or nonemergency health care services under the circumstances described in RCW 48.49.020:

    a. The enrollee satisfies his or her obligation to pay for the health care services if he or she pays the in-network cost-sharing amount specified in the enrollee's or applicable group's health plan contract. The enrollee's obligation must be determined using the carrier's median in-network contracted rate for the same or similar service in the same or similar geographical area. The carrier must provide an explanation of benefits to the enrollee and the out-of-network provider that reflects the cost-sharing amount determined under this subsection.

    b. The carrier, out-of-network provider, or out-of-network facility, and an agent, trustee, or assignee of the carrier, out-of-network provider, or out-of-network facility must ensure that the enrollee incurs no greater cost than the amount determined under (a) of this subsection.

    c. The out-of-network provider or out-of-network facility, and an agent, trustee, or assignee of the out-of-network provider or out-of-network facility may not balance bill or otherwise attempt to collect from the enrollee any amount greater than the amount determined under (a) of this subsection. This does not impact the provider's ability to collect a past due balance for that cost-sharing amount with interest.

    d. The carrier must treat any cost-sharing amounts determined under (a) of this subsection paid by the enrollee for an out-of-network provider or facility's services in the same manner as cost-sharing for health care services provided by an in-network provider or facility and must apply any cost-sharing amounts paid by the enrollee for such services toward the enrollee's maximum out-of-pocket payment obligation.

    e. If the enrollee pays the out-of-network provider or out-of-network facility an amount that exceeds the in-network cost-sharing amount determined under (a) of this subsection, the provider or facility must refund any amount in excess of the in-network cost-sharing amount to the enrollee within thirty business days of receipt. Interest must be paid to the enrollee for any unrefunded payments at a rate of twelve percent beginning on the first calendar day after the thirty business days.

2. The allowed amount paid to an out-of-network provider for health care services described under RCW 48.49.020 shall be a commercially reasonable amount, based on payments for the same or similar services provided in a similar geographic area. Within thirty calendar days of receipt of a claim from an out-of-network provider or facility, the carrier shall offer to pay the provider or facility a commercially reasonable amount. If the out-of-network provider or facility wants to dispute the carrier's payment, the provider or facility must notify the carrier no later than thirty calendar days after receipt of payment or payment notification from the carrier. If the out-of-network provider or facility disputes the carrier's initial offer, the carrier and provider or facility have thirty calendar days from the initial offer to negotiate in good faith. If the carrier and the out-of-network provider or facility do not agree to a commercially reasonable payment amount within thirty calendar days, and the carrier, out-of-network provider or out-of-network facility chooses to pursue further action to resolve the dispute, the dispute shall be resolved through arbitration, as provided in RCW 48.49.040.

3. The carrier must make payments for health care services described in RCW 48.49.020 provided by out-of-network providers or facilities directly to the provider or facility, rather than the enrollee.

4. Carriers must make available through electronic and other methods of communication generally used by a provider to verify enrollee eligibility and benefits information regarding whether an enrollee's health plan is subject to the requirements of chapter 427, Laws of 2019.

5. A health care provider, hospital, or ambulatory surgical facility may not require a patient at any time, for any procedure, service, or supply, to sign or execute by electronic means, any document that would attempt to avoid, waive, or alter any provision of this section.

6. This section shall only apply to health care providers or facilities providing services to members of entities administering a self-funded group health plan and its plan members if the entity has elected to participate in RCW 48.49.020 through 48.49.040 as provided in RCW 48.49.130.

\[ [2019 c 427 § 7](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/2019-20/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/House/1065-S2.SL.pdf?cite=2019%20c%20427%20§%207); \]

## 48.49.040 - Dispute resolution process—Determination of commercially reasonable payment amount.
1. [Empty]
    a. Notwithstanding RCW 48.43.055 and 48.18.200, if good faith negotiation, as described in RCW 48.49.030 does not result in resolution of the dispute, and the carrier, out-of-network provider or out-of-network facility chooses to pursue further action to resolve the dispute, the carrier, out-of-network provider, or out-of-network facility shall initiate arbitration to determine a commercially reasonable payment amount. To initiate arbitration, the carrier, provider, or facility must provide written notification to the commissioner and the noninitiating party no later than ten calendar days following completion of the period of good faith negotiation under RCW 48.49.030. The notification to the noninitiating party must state the initiating party's final offer. No later than thirty calendar days following receipt of the notification, the noninitiating party must provide its final offer to the initiating party. The parties may reach an agreement on reimbursement during this time and before the arbitration proceeding.

    b. Multiple claims may be addressed in a single arbitration proceeding if the claims at issue:

        i. Involve identical carrier and provider or facility parties;

        ii. Involve claims with the same or related current procedural terminology codes relevant to a particular procedure; and

        iii. Occur within a period of two months of one another.

2. Within seven calendar days of receipt of notification from the initiating party, the commissioner must provide the parties with a list of approved arbitrators or entities that provide arbitration. The arbitrators on the list must be trained by the American arbitration association or the American health lawyers association and should have experience in matters related to medical or health care services. The parties may agree on an arbitrator from the list provided by the commissioner. If the parties do not agree on an arbitrator, they must notify the commissioner who must provide them with the names of five arbitrators from the list. Each party may veto two of the five named arbitrators. If one arbitrator remains, that person is the chosen arbitrator. If more than one arbitrator remains, the commissioner must choose the arbitrator from the remaining arbitrators. The parties and the commissioner must complete this selection process within twenty calendar days of receipt of the original list from the commissioner.

3. [Empty]
    a. Each party must make written submissions to the arbitrator in support of its position no later than thirty calendar days after the final selection of the arbitrator. The initiating party must include in its written submission the evidence and methodology for asserting that the amount proposed to be paid is or is not commercially reasonable. A party that fails to make timely written submissions under this section without good cause shown shall be considered to be in default and the arbitrator shall require the party in default to pay the final offer amount submitted by the party not in default and may require the party in default to pay expenses incurred to date in the course of arbitration, including the arbitrator's expenses and fees and the reasonable attorneys' fees of the party not in default. No later than thirty calendar days after the receipt of the parties' written submissions, the arbitrator must: Issue a written decision requiring payment of the final offer amount of either the initiating party or the noninitiating party; notify the parties of its decision; and provide the decision and the information described in RCW 48.49.050 regarding the decision to the commissioner.

    b. In reviewing the submissions of the parties and making a decision related to whether payment should be made at the final offer amount of the initiating party or the noninitiating party, the arbitrator must consider the following factors:

        i. The evidence and methodology submitted by the parties to assert that their final offer amount is reasonable; and

        ii. Patient characteristics and the circumstances and complexity of the case, including time and place of service and whether the service was delivered at a level I or level II trauma center or a rural facility, that are not already reflected in the provider's billing code for the service.

    c. The arbitrator may not require extrinsic evidence of authenticity for admitting data from the Washington state all-payer claims database data set developed under RCW 43.371.100 into evidence.

    d. The arbitrator may also consider other information that a party believes is relevant to the factors included in (b) of this subsection or other factors the arbitrator requests and information provided by the parties that is relevant to such request, including the Washington state all-payer claims database data set developed under RCW 43.371.100.

4. Expenses incurred in the course of arbitration, including the arbitrator's expenses and fees, but not including attorneys' fees, must be divided equally among the parties to the arbitration. The enrollee is not liable for any of the costs of the arbitration and may not be required to participate in the arbitration proceeding as a witness or otherwise.

5. Within ten business days of a party notifying the commissioner and the noninitiating party of intent to initiate arbitration, both parties shall agree to and execute a nondisclosure agreement. The nondisclosure agreement must not preclude the arbitrator from submitting the arbitrator's decision to the commissioner under subsection (3) of this section or impede the commissioner's duty to prepare the annual report under RCW 48.49.050.

6. Chapter 7.04A RCW applies to arbitrations conducted under this section, but in the event of a conflict between this section and chapter 7.04A RCW, this section governs.

7. This section applies to health care providers or facilities providing services to members of entities administering a self-funded group health plan and its plan members only if the entity has elected to participate in RCW 48.49.020 and 48.49.030 and this section as provided in RCW 48.49.130.

8. An entity administering a self-funded group health plan that has elected to participate in this section pursuant to RCW 48.49.130 shall comply with the provisions of this section.

\[ [2019 c 427 § 8](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/2019-20/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/House/1065-S2.SL.pdf?cite=2019%20c%20427%20§%208); \]

## 48.49.050 - Commissioner's annual report on dispute resolution information regarding arbitration over commercially reasonable payment amounts. (Expires January 1, 2024.)
1. The commissioner must prepare an annual report summarizing the dispute resolution information provided by arbitrators under RCW 48.49.040. The report must include summary information related to the matters decided through arbitration, as well as the following information for each dispute resolved through arbitration: The name of the carrier; the name of the health care provider; the health care provider's employer or the business entity in which the provider has an ownership interest; the health care facility where the services were provided; and the type of health care services at issue.

2. The commissioner must post the report on the office of the insurance commissioner's website and submit the report in compliance with RCW 43.01.036 to the appropriate committees of the legislature, annually by July 1st.

3. This section expires January 1, 2024.

\[ [2019 c 427 § 9](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/2019-20/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/House/1065-S2.SL.pdf?cite=2019%20c%20427%20§%209); \]

## 48.49.060 - Notice of consumer rights concerning balance billing protection—Development of standard template language by commissioner.
1. The commissioner, in consultation with health carriers, health care providers, health care facilities, and consumers, must develop standard template language for a notice of consumer rights notifying consumers that:

    a. The prohibition against balance billing in this chapter is applicable to health plans issued by carriers in Washington state and self-funded group health plans that elect to participate in RCW 48.49.020 through 48.49.040 as provided in RCW 48.49.130;

    b. They cannot be balance billed for the health care services described in RCW 48.49.020 and will receive the protections provided by RCW 48.49.030; and

    c. They may be balance billed for health care services under circumstances other than those described in RCW 48.49.020 or if they are enrolled in a health plan to which chapter 427, Laws of 2019 does not apply, and steps they can take if they are balance billed.

2. The standard template language must include contact information for the office of the insurance commissioner so that consumers may contact the office of the insurance commissioner if they believe they have received a balance bill in violation of this chapter.

3. The office of the insurance commissioner shall determine by rule when and in what format health carriers, health care providers, and health care facilities must provide consumers with the notice developed under this section.

\[ [2019 c 427 § 10](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/2019-20/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/House/1065-S2.SL.pdf?cite=2019%20c%20427%20§%2010); \]

## 48.49.070 - Hospital or ambulatory surgical facility—Requirement to provide certain information on website or upon consumer request—Requirement to provide carriers with nonemployed provider lists.
1. [Empty]
    a. A hospital or ambulatory surgical facility must post the following information on its website, if one is available:

        i. The listing of the carrier health plan provider networks with which the hospital or ambulatory surgical facility is an in-network provider, based upon the information provided by the carrier pursuant to RCW 48.43.730(7); and

        ii. The notice of consumer rights developed under RCW 48.49.060.

    b. If the hospital or ambulatory surgical facility does not maintain a website, this information must be provided to consumers upon an oral or written request.

2. Posting or otherwise providing the information required in this section does not relieve a hospital or ambulatory surgical facility of its obligation to comply with the provisions of this chapter.

3. Not less than thirty days prior to executing a contract with a carrier, a hospital or ambulatory surgical facility must provide the carrier with a list of the nonemployed providers or provider groups contracted to provide surgical or ancillary services at the hospital or ambulatory surgical facility. The hospital or ambulatory surgical facility must notify the carrier within thirty days of a removal from or addition to the nonemployed provider list. A hospital or ambulatory surgical facility also must provide an updated list of these providers within fourteen calendar days of a request for an updated list by a carrier.

\[ [2019 c 427 § 11](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/2019-20/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/House/1065-S2.SL.pdf?cite=2019%20c%20427%20§%2011); \]

## 48.49.080 - Health care provider—Requirement to provide certain information on website or upon consumer request—Requirement to submit network status information to carriers.
1. [Empty]
    a. A health care provider must provide the following information on its website, if one is available:

        i. The listing of the carrier health plan provider networks with which the provider contracts, based upon the information provided by the carrier pursuant to RCW 48.43.730(7); and

        ii. The notice of consumer rights developed under RCW 48.49.060.

    b. If the health care provider does not maintain a website, this information must be provided to consumers upon an oral or written request.

2. Posting or otherwise providing the information required in this section does not relieve a provider of its obligation to comply with the provisions of this chapter.

3. An in-network provider must submit accurate information to a carrier regarding the provider's network status in a timely manner, consistent with the terms of the contract between the provider and the carrier.

\[ [2019 c 427 § 12](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/2019-20/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/House/1065-S2.SL.pdf?cite=2019%20c%20427%20§%2012); \]

## 48.49.090 - Carrier—Requirement to update website and provider directory—Requirement to provide enrollee with certain information.
1. A carrier must update its website and provider directory no later than thirty days after the addition or termination of a facility or provider.

2. A carrier must provide an enrollee with:

    a. A clear description of the health plan's out-of-network health benefits; and

    b. The notice of consumer rights developed under RCW 48.49.060;

    c. Notification that if the enrollee receives services from an out-of-network provider or facility, under circumstances other than those described in RCW 48.49.020, the enrollee will have the financial responsibility applicable to services provided outside the health plan's network in excess of applicable cost-sharing amounts and that the enrollee may be responsible for any costs in excess of those allowed by the health plan;

    d. Information on how to use the carrier's member transparency tools under RCW 48.43.007;

    e. Upon request, information regarding whether a health care provider is in-network or out-of-network, and whether there are in-network providers available to provide surgical or ancillary services at specified in-network hospitals or ambulatory surgical facilities; and

    f. Upon request, an estimated range of the out-of-pocket costs for an out-of-network benefit.

\[ [2019 c 427 § 13](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/2019-20/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/House/1065-S2.SL.pdf?cite=2019%20c%20427%20§%2013); \]

## 48.49.100 - Pattern of unresolved violations—Enforcement action by department of health or appropriate disciplining authority.
1. If the commissioner has cause to believe that any health care provider, hospital, or ambulatory surgical facility, has engaged in a pattern of unresolved violations of RCW 48.49.020 or 48.49.030, the commissioner may submit information to the department of health or the appropriate disciplining authority for action. Prior to submitting information to the department of health or the appropriate disciplining authority, the commissioner may provide the health care provider, hospital, or ambulatory surgical facility, with an opportunity to cure the alleged violations or explain why the actions in question did not violate RCW 48.49.020 or 48.49.030.

2. If any health care provider, hospital, or ambulatory surgical facility, has engaged in a pattern of unresolved violations of RCW 48.49.020 or 48.49.030, the department of health or the appropriate disciplining authority may levy a fine or cost recovery upon the health care provider, hospital, or ambulatory surgical facility in an amount not to exceed the applicable statutory amount per violation and take other action as permitted under the authority of the department or disciplining authority. Upon completion of its review of any potential violation submitted by the commissioner or initiated directly by an enrollee, the department of health or the disciplining authority shall notify the commissioner of the results of the review, including whether the violation was substantiated and any enforcement action taken as a result of a finding of a substantiated violation.

3. If a carrier has engaged in a pattern of unresolved violations of any provision of this chapter, the commissioner may levy a fine or apply remedies authorized under chapter 48.02 RCW, RCW 48.44.166, 48.46.135, or 48.05.185.

4. For purposes of this section, "disciplining authority" means the agency, board, or commission having the authority to take disciplinary action against a holder of, or applicant for, a professional or business license upon a finding of a violation of chapter 18.130 RCW or a chapter specified under RCW 18.130.040.

\[ [2019 c 427 § 14](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/2019-20/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/House/1065-S2.SL.pdf?cite=2019%20c%20427%20§%2014); \]

## 48.49.110 - Rule-making authority.
The commissioner may adopt rules to implement and administer this chapter, including rules governing the dispute resolution process established in RCW 48.49.040.

\[ [2019 c 427 § 15](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/2019-20/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/House/1065-S2.SL.pdf?cite=2019%20c%20427%20§%2015); \]

## 48.49.120 - No application of chapter to health plans under chapter  74.09 RCW.
This chapter does not apply to health plans that provide benefits under chapter 74.09 RCW.

\[ [2019 c 427 § 22](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/2019-20/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/House/1065-S2.SL.pdf?cite=2019%20c%20427%20§%2022); \]

## 48.49.130 - Application of chapter to self-funded group health plans that elect to participate in balance billing protection provisions—Annual notice to commissioner.
The provisions of this chapter apply to a self-funded group health plan governed by the provisions of the federal employee retirement income security act of 1974 (29 U.S.C. Sec. 1001 et seq.) only if the self-funded group health plan elects to participate in the provisions of RCW 48.49.020 through 48.49.040. To elect to participate in these provisions, the self-funded group health plan shall provide notice, on an annual basis, to the commissioner in a manner prescribed by the commissioner, attesting to the plan's participation and agreeing to be bound by RCW 48.49.020 through 48.49.040. An entity administering a self-funded health benefits plan that elects to participate under this section, shall comply with the provisions of RCW 48.49.020 through 48.49.040.

\[ [2019 c 427 § 23](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/2019-20/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/House/1065-S2.SL.pdf?cite=2019%20c%20427%20§%2023); \]

## 48.49.140 - Liberal construction of chapter to promote public interest.
This chapter must be liberally construed to promote the public interest by ensuring that consumers are not billed out-of-network charges and do not receive additional bills from providers under the circumstances described in RCW 48.49.020.

\[ [2019 c 427 § 24](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/2019-20/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/House/1065-S2.SL.pdf?cite=2019%20c%20427%20§%2024); \]

## 48.49.150 - Determining the adequacy of provider networks—Required considerations.
When determining the adequacy of a proposed provider network or the ongoing adequacy of an in-force provider network, the commissioner must consider whether the carrier's proposed provider network or in-force provider network includes a sufficient number of contracted providers of emergency and surgical or ancillary services at or for the carrier's contracted in-network hospitals or ambulatory surgical facilities to reasonably ensure enrollees have in-network access to covered benefits delivered at that facility.

\[ [2019 c 427 § 25](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/2019-20/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/House/1065-S2.SL.pdf?cite=2019%20c%20427%20§%2025); \]

## 48.49.900 - Effective date—2019 c 427.
Except for section 26 of this act, this act takes effect January 1, 2020.

\[ [2019 c 427 § 31](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/2019-20/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/House/1065-S2.SL.pdf?cite=2019%20c%20427%20§%2031); \]

