# 48.88 - Day care services—Joint underwriting association.
* [48.88.010 - Intent.](#4888010---intent)
* [48.88.020 - Definitions.](#4888020---definitions)
* [48.88.030 - Plan for joint underwriting association.](#4888030---plan-for-joint-underwriting-association)
* [48.88.040 - Association—Membership.](#4888040---associationmembership)
* [48.88.050 - Policies—Liability limits—Rating plan.](#4888050---policiesliability-limitsrating-plan)
* [48.88.070 - Rules.](#4888070---rules)
## 48.88.010 - Intent.
Day care service providers have experienced major problems in both the availability and affordability of liability insurance. Premiums for such insurance policies have recently grown as much as five hundred percent and the availability of such insurance in Washington markets has greatly diminished.

The availability of quality day care is essential to achieving such goals as increased workforce productivity, family self-sufficiency, and protection for children at risk due to poverty and abuse. The unavailability of adequate liability insurance threatens to decrease the availability of day care services.

This chapter is intended to remedy the problem of unavailable liability insurance for day care services by requiring all insurers authorized to write commercial or professional liability insurance to be members of a joint underwriting association created to provide liability insurance for day care services.

\[ [1986 c 141 § 1](http://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1986c141.pdf?cite=1986%20c%20141%20§%201); \]

## 48.88.020 - Definitions.
Unless the context clearly requires otherwise, the definitions in this section apply throughout this chapter.

1. "Association" means the joint underwriting association established pursuant to the provisions of this chapter.

2. "Day care insurance" means insurance coverage against the legal liability of the insured and against loss, damage, or expense incident to a claim arising out of the death or injury of any person as the result of negligence or malpractice in rendering professional service by any licensee.

3. "Licensee" means any person or facility licensed to provide day care services pursuant to chapter 74.15 RCW.

\[ [1986 c 141 § 2](http://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1986c141.pdf?cite=1986%20c%20141%20§%202); \]

## 48.88.030 - Plan for joint underwriting association.
The commissioner shall approve by July 1, 1986, a reasonable plan for the establishment of a nonprofit, joint underwriting association for day care insurance, subject to the conditions and limitations contained in this chapter.

\[ [1986 c 141 § 3](http://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1986c141.pdf?cite=1986%20c%20141%20§%203); \]

## 48.88.040 - Association—Membership.
The association shall be comprised of all insurers possessing a certificate of authority to write and engage in writing property and casualty insurance within this state on a direct basis, including the liability portion of multiperil policies, but not of ocean marine insurance. Every such insurer shall be a member of the association and shall remain a member as a condition of its authority to continue to transact business in this state.

\[ [1986 c 141 § 4](http://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1986c141.pdf?cite=1986%20c%20141%20§%204); \]

## 48.88.050 - Policies—Liability limits—Rating plan.
Any licensee may apply to the association to purchase day care insurance, and the association shall offer a policy with liability limits of at least one hundred thousand dollars per occurrence. The commissioner shall require the use of a rating plan for day care insurance that permits rates to be modified for individual licensees according to the type, size and past loss experience of the licensee including any other difference among licensees that can be demonstrated to have a probable effect upon losses.

\[ [1986 c 141 § 5](http://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1986c141.pdf?cite=1986%20c%20141%20§%205); \]

## 48.88.070 - Rules.
The commissioner may adopt all rules necessary to ensure the efficient, equitable operation of the association, including but not limited to, rules requiring or limiting certain policy provisions.

\[ [1986 c 141 § 7](http://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1986c141.pdf?cite=1986%20c%20141%20§%207); \]

