# 48.27 - Property insurance.
* [48.27.010 - Over-insurance prohibited.](#4827010---over-insurance-prohibited)
* [48.27.020 - Replacement insurance.](#4827020---replacement-insurance)
* [48.27.030 - Policy does not cover flood damage—Notice to policyholder.](#4827030---policy-does-not-cover-flood-damagenotice-to-policyholder)
## 48.27.010 - Over-insurance prohibited.
1. Over-insurance shall be deemed to exist if property or an insurable interest therein is insured by one or more insurance contracts against the same hazard in any amount in excess of the fair value of the property or of such interest, as determined as of the effective date of the insurance or of any renewal thereof, or in those instances when insured value is for improvements and land.

2. For the purposes of this section only the term "fair value" means the cost of replacement less such depreciation as is properly applicable to the subject insured.

3. No person shall knowingly require, request, issue, place, procure, or accept any insurance contract which would result in over-insurance of the property or interest therein proposed to be insured, except as is provided in RCW 48.27.020.

4. No person shall compel an insured or applicant for insurance to procure property insurance in an amount in excess of the amount which could reasonably be expected to be paid under the policy (or combination of policies) in the event of a loss, whether such insurance is required in connection with a loan or otherwise.

5. Each violation of this section shall subject the violator to the penalties provided by this code.

\[ [1984 c 6 § 1](http://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1984c6.pdf?cite=1984%20c%206%20§%201); 1947 c 79 § .27.01; Rem. Supp. 1947 § 45.27.01; \]

## 48.27.020 - Replacement insurance.
By any contract of insurance of property or of any insurable interest therein, the insurer may in connection with a special provision or endorsement made a part of the policy insure the cost of repair or replacement of such property, if damaged or destroyed by a hazard insured against, and without deduction of depreciation, subject to such reasonable rules and regulations as may be made by the commissioner.

\[ [1951 c 194 § 1](http://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1951c194.pdf?cite=1951%20c%20194%20§%201); 1947 c 79 § .27.02; formerly Rem. Supp. 1947 § 45.27.02; \]

## 48.27.030 - Policy does not cover flood damage—Notice to policyholder.
1. Every insurer issuing a homeowner, condominium unit owner, residential tenant, and residential fire insurance policy that does not cover damage caused by flood must notify the policyholder that the policy does not cover damage caused by flood. The notice must also inform the policyholder how to contact the national flood insurance program ("NFIP") or one of the NFIP's agents. This notice must be provided:

   a. At the time the policy is issued; and

   b. At the time the policy is renewed.

2. The following language, when combined with current information about how to contact the NFIP or its agent, satisfies the notice requirements of this section:

"This policy does not cover damage to your property caused by flooding. The federal government offers flood insurance through the National Flood Insurance Program to residents of communities that participate in its program. You can learn more about the National Flood Insurance Program at www.floodsmart.gov or by calling (888) 379-9531."

3. Nothing in this section invalidates a flood exclusion, or any other exclusion, in an insurance policy subject to this section.

\[ [2009 c 14 § 1](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/2009-10/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/Senate/5417-S.SL.pdf?cite=2009%20c%2014%20§%201); \]

