# 48.23 - Life insurance and annuities.
* [48.23.010 - Scope of chapter.](#4823010---scope-of-chapter)
* [48.23.015 - Purchase or exchange of annuities—Definitions—Standards—Requirements—Conduct—Records—Penalties—Rules.](#4823015---purchase-or-exchange-of-annuitiesdefinitionsstandardsrequirementsconductrecordspenaltiesrules)
* [48.23.020 - Standard provisions required—Life insurance.](#4823020---standard-provisions-requiredlife-insurance)
* [48.23.030 - Grace period.](#4823030---grace-period)
* [48.23.040 - Entire contract—Representations.](#4823040---entire-contractrepresentations)
* [48.23.050 - Incontestability.](#4823050---incontestability)
* [48.23.060 - Misstatement of age.](#4823060---misstatement-of-age)
* [48.23.070 - Participation in surplus.](#4823070---participation-in-surplus)
* [48.23.075 - Participation in surplus—Requirements for forms.](#4823075---participation-in-surplusrequirements-for-forms)
* [48.23.080 - Policy loan.](#4823080---policy-loan)
* [48.23.085 - Policy loan interest rates.](#4823085---policy-loan-interest-rates)
* [48.23.090 - Table of values and options.](#4823090---table-of-values-and-options)
* [48.23.100 - Nonforfeiture options.](#4823100---nonforfeiture-options)
* [48.23.110 - Table of installments.](#4823110---table-of-installments)
* [48.23.120 - Reinstatement.](#4823120---reinstatement)
* [48.23.130 - Settlement on proof of death.](#4823130---settlement-on-proof-of-death)
* [48.23.140 - Standard provisions—Annuities, pure endowment contracts.](#4823140---standard-provisionsannuities-pure-endowment-contracts)
* [48.23.150 - Grace period—Annuities, pure endowments.](#4823150---grace-periodannuities-pure-endowments)
* [48.23.160 - Incontestability—Annuities, pure endowments.](#4823160---incontestabilityannuities-pure-endowments)
* [48.23.170 - Entire contract—Annuities, pure endowments.](#4823170---entire-contractannuities-pure-endowments)
* [48.23.180 - Misstatement of age or sex—Annuities, pure endowments.](#4823180---misstatement-of-age-or-sexannuities-pure-endowments)
* [48.23.190 - Dividends—Annuities, pure endowments.](#4823190---dividendsannuities-pure-endowments)
* [48.23.200 - Nonforfeiture benefits—Annuities, pure endowments.](#4823200---nonforfeiture-benefitsannuities-pure-endowments)
* [48.23.210 - Reinstatement—Annuities, pure endowments.](#4823210---reinstatementannuities-pure-endowments)
* [48.23.220 - Standard provisions—Reversionary annuities.](#4823220---standard-provisionsreversionary-annuities)
* [48.23.230 - Sections applicable.](#4823230---sections-applicable)
* [48.23.240 - Reinstatement—Reversionary annuities.](#4823240---reinstatementreversionary-annuities)
* [48.23.250 - Supplemental benefits.](#4823250---supplemental-benefits)
* [48.23.260 - Limitation of liability.](#4823260---limitation-of-liability)
* [48.23.270 - Incontestability after reinstatement.](#4823270---incontestability-after-reinstatement)
* [48.23.290 - Premium deposits.](#4823290---premium-deposits)
* [48.23.300 - Policy settlements—Interest.](#4823300---policy-settlementsinterest)
* [48.23.310 - Deduction of indebtedness.](#4823310---deduction-of-indebtedness)
* [48.23.320 - Miscellaneous proceeds.](#4823320---miscellaneous-proceeds)
* [48.23.330 - Trafficking in dividend rights.](#4823330---trafficking-in-dividend-rights)
* [48.23.340 - Prohibited policy plans.](#4823340---prohibited-policy-plans)
* [48.23.345 - Juvenile life insurance—Speculative or fraudulent purposes.](#4823345---juvenile-life-insurancespeculative-or-fraudulent-purposes)
* [48.23.360 - Calculation of nonforfeiture benefits under annuities.](#4823360---calculation-of-nonforfeiture-benefits-under-annuities)
* [48.23.370 - Duties of insurer issuing both participating and nonparticipating policies—Rules.](#4823370---duties-of-insurer-issuing-both-participating-and-nonparticipating-policiesrules)
* [48.23.380 - Return of policy and refund of premium—Grace period—Notice—Effect.](#4823380---return-of-policy-and-refund-of-premiumgrace-periodnoticeeffect)
* [48.23.410 - Short title.](#4823410---short-title)
* [48.23.420 - Inapplicability of enumerated sections to certain policies.](#4823420---inapplicability-of-enumerated-sections-to-certain-policies)
* [48.23.430 - Paid-up annuity and cash surrender provisions required.](#4823430---paid-up-annuity-and-cash-surrender-provisions-required)
* [48.23.440 - Minimum nonforfeiture amounts.](#4823440---minimum-nonforfeiture-amounts)
* [48.23.450 - Minimum present value of paid-up annuity benefit.](#4823450---minimum-present-value-of-paid-up-annuity-benefit)
* [48.23.460 - Minimum cash surrender benefits—Death benefit.](#4823460---minimum-cash-surrender-benefitsdeath-benefit)
* [48.23.470 - Contracts without cash surrender, death benefits—Minimum present value of paid-up annuity benefits.](#4823470---contracts-without-cash-surrender-death-benefitsminimum-present-value-of-paid-up-annuity-benefits)
* [48.23.480 - Optional maturity dates.](#4823480---optional-maturity-dates)
* [48.23.490 - Statement required in contract without cash surrender or death benefits.](#4823490---statement-required-in-contract-without-cash-surrender-or-death-benefits)
* [48.23.500 - Calculation of benefits available other than on contract anniversary.](#4823500---calculation-of-benefits-available-other-than-on-contract-anniversary)
* [48.23.510 - Additional benefits.](#4823510---additional-benefits)
* [48.23.525 - Individual life insurance—Noninsurance benefits—Rules.](#4823525---individual-life-insurancenoninsurance-benefitsrules)
* [48.23.900 - Construction—Chapter applicable to state registered domestic partnerships—2009 c 521.](#4823900---constructionchapter-applicable-to-state-registered-domestic-partnerships2009-c-521)
## 48.23.010 - Scope of chapter.
This chapter applies to contracts of life insurance and annuities other than group life insurance, group annuities, and, except for RCW 48.23.260, 48.23.270, and 48.23.340, other than industrial life insurance. However, Title 48 RCW does not apply to charitable gift annuities issued by a board of a state university, regional university, or a state college, nor to the issuance thereof.

\[ [2005 c 223 § 12](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/2005-06/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/House/1197-S.SL.pdf?cite=2005%20c%20223%20§%2012); [1979 c 130 § 2](http://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1979c130.pdf?cite=1979%20c%20130%20§%202); 1947 c 79 § .23.01; Rem. Supp. 1947 § 45.23.01; \]

## 48.23.015 - Purchase or exchange of annuities—Definitions—Standards—Requirements—Conduct—Records—Penalties—Rules.
1. For the purposes of this section:

    a.  "Annuity" means a fixed annuity or variable annuity that is individually solicited, whether the product is classified as an individual or group annuity.

    b.  "Recommendation" means advice provided by an insurance producer, or an insurer when no producer is involved, to an individual consumer that results in a purchase or exchange of an annuity in accordance with that advice.

2. Insurers and insurance producers must comply with the following requirements in recommending and executing a purchase or exchange of an annuity:

    a.  In recommending the purchase of an annuity or the exchange of an annuity that results in another insurance transaction or series of insurance transactions to a consumer, the insurance producer, or the insurer when no producer is involved, must have reasonable grounds for believing that the recommendation is suitable for the consumer on the basis of the facts disclosed by the consumer about their investments and other insurance products and as to their financial situation and needs.

    b.  Prior to the execution of a purchase or exchange of an annuity resulting from a recommendation, an insurance producer, or an insurer when no producer is involved, shall make reasonable efforts to obtain information concerning:

        i.  The consumer's financial status;

        ii.  The consumer's tax status;

        iii.  The consumer's investment objectives; and

        iv.  Other information used or considered to be reasonable by the insurance producer, or the insurer when no producer is involved, in making recommendations to the consumer.

3. An insurer or insurance producer's recommendation must be reasonable under all circumstances actually known to the insurer or insurance producer at the time of the recommendation. Neither an insurance producer nor an insurer when no producer is involved, has any obligation to a consumer under subsection (2) of this section related to any recommendation if a consumer:

    a.  Refuses to provide relevant information requested by the insurer or insurance producer;

    b.  Decides to enter into an insurance transaction that is not based on a recommendation of the insurer or insurance producer; or

    c.  Fails to provide complete or accurate information.

4. An insurer must assure that a system to supervise recommendations, reasonably designed to achieve compliance with this section, is established and maintained. The system must include, but is not limited to, written procedures and conducting periodic review of its records that are reasonably designed to assist in detecting and preventing violations of this section.

    a.  An insurer may contract with a third party, including insurance producers, a general agent, or independent agency, to establish and maintain a system of supervision as required in this subsection with respect to insurance producers under contract with or employed by the third party. An insurer must make reasonable inquiry to assure that the third party is performing the functions required in this subsection and must take action as is reasonable under the circumstances to enforce the contractual obligation to perform the functions. An insurer may comply with its obligation to make reasonable inquiry by doing all of the following:

        i.  Annually obtaining a certification from a third party senior manager with responsibility for the delegated functions that the manager has a reasonable basis to represent, and does represent, that the third party is performing the required functions; and

        ii.  Based on reasonable selection criteria, periodically selecting third parties contracting under this subsection for a review to determine whether the third parties are performing the required functions. The insurer shall perform those procedures to conduct the review that are reasonable under the circumstances.

    b.  An insurer, or the contracted third party if a general agent or independent agency, is not required to:

        i.  Review, or provide for review of, all insurance producer solicited transactions; or

        ii.  Include in its system of supervision an insurance producer's recommendations to consumers of products other than the annuities offered by the insurer, general agent, or independent agency.

    c.  A general agent or independent agency contracting with an insurer to supervise compliance with this section shall promptly, when requested by the insurer, give a certification of compliance or give a clear statement that it is unable to meet the certification criteria. A person may not provide a certification unless the person:

        i.  Is a senior manager with responsibility for the delegated functions; and

        ii.  Has a reasonable basis for making the certification.

5. Compliance with the financial industry regulatory authority conduct rules pertaining to suitability satisfies the requirements under this section for the recommendation of annuities registered under the securities act of 1933 (15 U.S.C. Sec. 77(a) et seq. or as hereafter amended). The insurance commissioner must notify the appropriate committees of the house of representatives and senate if there are changes regarding the registration of annuities under the securities act of 1933 that affect the application of this subsection. This subsection does not limit the insurance commissioner's ability to enforce this section.

6. The commissioner may order an insurer, an insurance producer, or both, to take reasonably appropriate corrective action for any consumer harmed by the insurer's or insurance producer's violation of this section.

    a.  Any applicable penalty under this or other sections of Title 48 RCW may be reduced or eliminated by the commissioner if corrective action for the consumer was taken promptly after a violation was discovered.

    b.  This subsection does not limit the commissioner's ability to enforce this section or other applicable sections of Title 48 RCW.

7. Insurers and insurance producers must maintain or be able to make available to the commissioner records of the information collected from the consumer and other information used in making the recommendations that were the basis for the insurance transaction for five years after the insurance transaction is completed by the insurer, or for five years after the annuity begins paying benefits, whichever is longer. An insurer is permitted, but is not required, to maintain documentation on behalf of an insurance producer. This section does not relieve an insurance producer of the obligation to maintain records of insurance transactions as required by RCW 48.17.470. 

8. The commissioner may adopt rules to implement and administer this section.

9. Unless otherwise specifically included, this section does not apply to recommendations involving:

    a.  Direct response solicitations when there is no recommendation based on information collected from the consumer under this section; or

    b.  Contracts used to fund:

        i.  An employee pension or welfare benefit plan that is covered by the employment and income security act;

        ii.  A plan described by sections 401(a), 401(k), 403(b), 408(k), or 408(p) of the internal revenue code, as amended, if established or maintained by an employer;

        iii.  A government or church plan defined in section 414 of the internal revenue code, a government or church welfare benefit plan or a deferred compensation plan of a state or local government or tax exempt organization under section 457 of the internal revenue code;

        iv.  A nonqualified deferred compensation arrangement established or maintained by an employer or plan sponsor;

        v.  Settlements of or assumptions of liabilities associated with personal injury litigation or any dispute or claim resolution process; or

        vi.  Formal prepaid funeral contracts.

10. This section does not affect the application of chapter 21.20 RCW.

\[ [2009 c 18 § 2](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/2009-10/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/Senate/5671-S.SL.pdf?cite=2009%20c%2018%20§%202); \]

## 48.23.020 - Standard provisions required—Life insurance.
1. No policy of life insurance other than industrial, group and pure endowments with or without return of premiums or of premiums and interest, shall be delivered or issued for delivery in this state unless it contains in substance all of the provisions required by RCW 48.23.030 to 48.23.130, inclusive. This provision shall not apply to annuity contracts.

2. Any of such provisions or portions thereof not applicable to single premium or term policies shall to that extent not be incorporated therein.

\[ 1947 c 79 § .23.02; Rem. Supp. 1947 § 45.23.02; \]

## 48.23.030 - Grace period.
There shall be a provision that the insured is entitled to a grace period of one month, but not less than thirty days, within which the payment of any premium after the first may be made, subject at the option of the insurer to an interest charge not in excess of six percent per annum for the number of days of grace elapsing before the payment of the premium, during which period of grace the policy shall continue in force, but in case the policy becomes a claim during the grace period before the overdue premium is paid, or the deferred premiums of the current policy year, if any, are paid, the amount of such premium or premiums with interest thereon may be deducted in any settlement under the policy.

\[ 1947 c 79 § .23.03; Rem. Supp. 1947 § 45.23.03; \]

## 48.23.040 - Entire contract—Representations.
In all such policies other than those containing a clause making the policy incontestable from date of issue, there shall be a provision that the policy and the application therefor, if a copy thereof has been endorsed upon or attached to the policy at issue and made a part thereof, shall constitute the entire contract between the parties, and that all statements made by the applicant or by the insured, shall, in the absence of fraud, be deemed representations and not warranties.

\[ 1947 c 79 § .23.04; Rem. Supp. 1947 § 45.23.04; \]

## 48.23.050 - Incontestability.
There shall be a provision that the policy shall be incontestable after it has been in force during the lifetime of the insured for a period of two years from its date of issue, except for nonpayment of premiums and except, at the option of the insurer, as to provisions relative to benefits in event of total and permanent disability and as to provisions which grant additional insurance specifically against accidental death.

\[ 1947 c 79 § .23.05; Rem. Supp. 1947 § 45.23.05; \]

## 48.23.060 - Misstatement of age.
There shall be a provision that if it is found that the age of the insured (or the age of any other individual considered in determining the premium) has been misstated, the amount payable under the policy shall be such as the premium would have purchased at the correct age or ages, according to the insurer's rate at date of issue.

\[ 1947 c 79 § .23.06; Rem. Supp. 1947 § 45.23.06; \]

## 48.23.070 - Participation in surplus.
1. In all policies which provide for participation in the insurer's surplus, there shall be a provision that the policy shall so participate annually in the insurer's divisible surplus as apportioned by the insurer, beginning not later than the end of the third policy year. Any policy containing provision for annual participation beginning at the end of the first policy year, may also provide that each dividend shall be paid subject to the payment of the premiums for the next ensuing year. The insured under any annual dividend policy shall have the right each year to have the current dividend arising from such participation either paid in cash, or applied in accordance with such other dividend option as may be specified in the policy and elected by the insured. The policy shall further provide which of the options shall be effective if the insured shall fail to notify the insurer in writing of his or her election within the period of grace allowed for the payment of premium.

2. This section shall not apply to paid-up nonforfeiture benefits nor paid-up policies issued on default in payment of premiums.

\[ [2009 c 549 § 7107](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/2009-10/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/Senate/5038.SL.pdf?cite=2009%20c%20549%20§%207107); 1947 c 79 § .23.07; Rem. Supp. 1947 § 45.23.07; \]

## 48.23.075 - Participation in surplus—Requirements for forms.
1. Life insurance and annuity policy forms of the following types shall be defined and designated as participating forms of insurance only if they contain a provision for participation in the insurer's surplus, and shall be defined and designated as nonparticipating forms if they do not contain a provision for participation in the insurer's surplus:

    a.  Forms which provide that the premium or consideration at the time of issue and subsequent premiums or considerations will be established by the insurer based on current, or then current, projected assumptions for such factors as interest, mortality, persistency, expense, or other factors, subject to a maximum guaranteed premium or premiums set forth in the policy; and

    b.  Forms (except those for variable life insurance and variable annuity plans which are subject to chapter 48.18A RCW) which provide that their premiums or considerations are credited to an account to which interest is credited, and from which the cost of any life insurance or annuity benefits or other benefits or specified expenses are deducted.

2. The commissioner may by regulation further clarify the definitions and requirements contained in subsection (1) of this section, and may classify any other types of forms as participating or nonparticipating, consistent therewith.

\[ [1982 c 181 § 19](http://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1982c181.pdf?cite=1982%20c%20181%20§%2019); \]

## 48.23.080 - Policy loan.
1. There shall be a provision that after three full years' premiums have been paid thereon, the insurer at any time, while the policy is in force, will advance, on proper assignment or pledge of the policy and on the sole security thereof, at a rate of interest provided in this chapter as now or hereafter amended, a sum to be determined as follows:

    a.  If such policy is issued prior to the operative date of *RCW 48.23.350, the sum, including any interest paid in advance but not beyond the end of the current policy year, shall be equal to or at the option of the owner of the policy less than, the reserve at the end of the current policy year on the policy and on any dividend additions thereto, less a sum not more than two and one-half percent of the amount insured by the policy and of any dividend additions thereto. The policy may contain a provision by which the insurer reserves the right to defer the making of the loan, except when made to pay premiums, for a period not exceeding six months after the date of application therefor.

    b.  If such policy is issued on or after such operative date, the sum, including any interest to the end of the current policy year shall not exceed the cash surrender value at the end of the current policy year, as required by *RCW 48.23.350.

    c.  [Empty]

        i.  The policy shall contain (A) a provision that policy loans shall bear interest at a specified rate not exceeding six percent per annum, or (B) a provision that policy loans shall bear interest at a variable of not less than four nor more than eight percent per annum.

        ii.  The variable rate shall not be changed more frequently than once per year and no change may exceed one percent per annum except reductions. The insurer shall give at least thirty days' notice to the policy owner or the owner's designee of any changes in the interest rate.

        iii.  The provisions of (c)(i) and (c)(ii) of this subsection shall apply only in policies in existence prior to August 1, 1981.

2. Such policy shall further provide that the insurer may deduct from such loan value any existing indebtedness on the policy (unless such indebtedness has already been deducted in determining the cash surrender value) and any unpaid balance of the premium for the current policy year; and that if the loan is made or repaid on a date other than the anniversary of the policy, the insurer shall be entitled to interest for the portion of the current policy year at the rate of interest specified in the policy.

3. Such policy may further provide that if the interest on the loan is not paid when due, it shall be added to the existing indebtedness and shall bear interest at the same rate; and that if and when the total indebtedness on the policy, including interest due or accruing, equals or exceeds the amount of the loan value thereof which would otherwise exist at such time, the policy shall terminate in full settlement of such indebtedness and become void; except, that it shall be stipulated in the policy that no such termination shall be effective prior to the expiration of at least thirty days after notice of the pendency of the termination was mailed by the insurer to the insured and the assignee, if any, at their respective addresses last of record with the insurer.

4. The insurer shall provide in any policy issued on or after the operative date of *RCW 48.23.350 that the making of any loan, other than a loan to pay premiums, may be deferred for not exceeding six months after the application for the loan has been received by it.

\[ [1981 c 247 § 3](http://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1981c247.pdf?cite=1981%20c%20247%20§%203); [1977 ex.s. c 250 § 1](http://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1977ex1c250.pdf?cite=1977%20ex.s.%20c%20250%20§%201); 1947 c 79 § .23.08; Rem. Supp. 1947 § 45.23.08; \]

## 48.23.085 - Policy loan interest rates.
1. As used in this section, "published monthly average" means:

    a.  The "Moody's Corporate Bond Yield Average - Monthly Average Corporates" as published by Moody's Investors Service, Incorporated or any successor thereto; or

    b.  If the "Moody's Corporate Bond Yield Average - Monthly Average Corporates" is no longer published, a substantially similar average, established by rule issued by the commissioner.

2. Policies issued on or after August 1, 1981, shall provide for policy loan interest rates by containing:

    a.  A provision permitting a maximum interest rate of not more than eight percent per annum; or

    b.  A provision permitting an adjustable maximum interest rate established from time to time by the life insurer as permitted by law.

3. The rate of interest charged on a policy loan made under (2)(b) of this section shall not exceed the higher of the following:

    a.  The published monthly average for the calendar month ending two months before the date on which the rate is determined; or

    b.  The rate used to compute the cash surrender values under the policy during the applicable period plus one percent per annum.

4. If the maximum rate of interest is determined pursuant to (2)(b) of this section, the policy shall contain a provision setting forth the frequency at which the rate is to be determined for that policy.

5. The maximum rate for each policy shall be determined at regular intervals at least once every twelve months, but not more frequently than once in any three-month period. At the intervals specified in the policy:

    a.  The rate being charged may be increased whenever such increase as determined under subsection (3) of this section would increase that rate by one-half of one percent or more per annum; and

    b.  The rate being charged shall be reduced whenever such reduction as determined under subsection (3) of this section would decrease that rate by one-half of one percent or more per annum.

6. The life insurer shall:

    a.  Notify the policyholder at the time a cash loan is made of the initial rate of interest on the loan;

    b.  Notify the policyholder with respect to premium loans of the initial rate of interest on the loan as soon as it is reasonably practical to do so after making the initial loan. Notice need not be given to the policyholder when a further premium loan is added, except as provided in (c) of this subsection;

    c.  Send to policyholders with loans reasonable advance notice of any increase in the rate; and

    d.  Include in the notices required in this subsection the substance of the pertinent provisions of subsections (2) and (4) of this section.

7. The substance of the pertinent provisions of subsections (2) and (4) of this section shall be set forth in the policies to which they apply.

8. The loan value of the policy shall be determined in accordance with RCW 48.23.080, but no policy shall terminate in a policy year as the sole result of change in the interest rate during that policy year, and the life insurer shall maintain coverage during that policy year until the time at which it would otherwise have terminated if there had been no change during that policy year.

9. For purposes of this section:

    a.  The rate of interest on policy loans permitted under this section includes the interest rate charged on reinstatement of policy loans for the period during and after any lapse of a policy;

    b.  The term "policy loan" includes any premium loan made under a policy to pay one or more premiums that were not paid to the life insurer as they fell due;

    c.  The term "policyholder" includes the owner of the policy or the person designated to pay premiums as shown on the records of the life insurer; and

    d.  The term "policy" includes certificates issued by a fraternal benefit society and annuity contracts which provide for policy loans.

10. No other provision of law shall apply to policy loan interest rates unless made specifically applicable to such rates.

\[ [1981 c 247 § 2](http://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1981c247.pdf?cite=1981%20c%20247%20§%202); \]

## 48.23.090 - Table of values and options.
There shall be a table showing in figures the loan value, if any, and any options available under the policy each year upon default in premium payments, during at least the first twenty years of the policy, or for its life if maturity or expiry occurs in less than twenty years.

\[ 1947 c 79 § .23.09; Rem. Supp. 1947 § 45.23.09; \]

## 48.23.100 - Nonforfeiture options.
There shall be a provision specifying the option to which the policyholder is automatically entitled in the absence of the election of other nonforfeiture options upon default in premium payment after nonforfeiture values become available.

\[ 1947 c 79 § .23.10; Rem. Supp. 1947 § 45.23.10; \]

## 48.23.110 - Table of installments.
If the policy provides for payment of its proceeds in installments or as an annuity, a table showing the amount and period of such installments or annuity shall be included in the policy. Except, that if in the judgment of the commissioner it is not practical to include certain tables in the policy, the requirements of this section may be met as to such policy by the insurer filing such tables with the commissioner.

\[ 1947 c 79 § .23.11; Rem. Supp. 1947 § 45.23.11; \]

## 48.23.120 - Reinstatement.
There shall be a provision that the policy may be reinstated at any time within three years after the date of default in the payment of any premium, unless the policy has been surrendered for its cash value, or the period of any extended insurance provided by the policy has expired, upon evidence of insurability satisfactory to the insurer and the payment of all overdue premiums, and payment (or, within the limits permitted by the then cash values of the policy, reinstatement) of any other indebtedness to the insurer upon the policy with interest as to premiums at a rate not exceeding six percent per annum compounded annually.

\[ [1981 c 247 § 4](http://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1981c247.pdf?cite=1981%20c%20247%20§%204); 1947 c 79 § .23.12; Rem. Supp. 1947 § 45.23.12; \]

## 48.23.130 - Settlement on proof of death.
There shall be a provision that when a policy becomes a claim by the death of the insured, settlement shall be made upon receipt of due proof of death and surrender of the policy.

\[ 1947 c 79 § .23.13; Rem. Supp. 1947 § 45.23.13; \]

## 48.23.140 - Standard provisions—Annuities, pure endowment contracts.
No annuity or pure endowment contract, other than reversionary annuities, or survivorship annuities, or group annuities, shall be delivered or issued for delivery in this state unless it contains in substance each of the provisions specified in RCW 48.23.150 to 48.23.210 inclusive. Any of such provisions not applicable to single premium annuities or single premium pure endowment contracts shall not, to that extent, be incorporated therein.

This section shall not apply to contracts for deferred annuities included in, or upon the lives of beneficiaries under, life insurance policies.

\[ 1947 c 79 § .23.14; Rem. Supp. 1947 § 45.23.14; \]

## 48.23.150 - Grace period—Annuities, pure endowments.
In such contracts, there shall be a provision that there shall be a period of grace of one month, but not less than thirty days, within which any stipulated payment to the insurer falling due after the first may be made, subject at the option of the insurer, to an interest charge thereon at a rate to be specified in the contract but not exceeding six percent per annum for the number of days of grace elapsing before such payment, during which period of grace, the contract shall continue in full force; but in case a claim arises under the contract on account of death prior to expiration of the period of grace before the overdue payment to the insurer of the deferred payments of the current contract year, if any, are made, the amount of such payments, with interest on any overdue payments, may be deducted from any amount payable under the contract in settlement.

\[ 1947 c 79 § .23.15; Rem. Supp. 1947 § 45.23.15; \]

## 48.23.160 - Incontestability—Annuities, pure endowments.
If any statements, other than those relating to age, sex, and identity, are required as a condition to issuing such an annuity or pure endowment contract, and subject to RCW 48.23.180, there shall be a provision that the contract shall be incontestable after it has been in force during the lifetime of the person or of each of the persons as to whom such statements are required, for a period of two years from its date of issue, except for nonpayment of stipulated payments to the insurer; and at the option of the insurer, such contract may also except any provisions relative to benefits in the event of total and permanent disability and any provisions which grant insurance specifically against death by accident.

\[ 1947 c 79 § .23.16; Rem. Supp. 1947 § 45.23.16; \]

## 48.23.170 - Entire contract—Annuities, pure endowments.
In such contracts there shall be a provision that the contract shall constitute the entire contract between the parties, or, if a copy of the application is endorsed upon or attached to the contract when issued, a provision that the contract and the application therefor shall constitute the entire contract between the parties.

\[ 1947 c 79 § .23.17; Rem. Supp. 1947 § 45.23.17; \]

## 48.23.180 - Misstatement of age or sex—Annuities, pure endowments.
In such contracts there shall be a provision that if the age or sex of the person or persons upon whose life or lives the contract is made, or if any of them has been misstated, the amount payable or benefit accruing under the contract shall be such as the stipulated payment or payments to the insurer would have purchased according to the correct age or sex; and that if the insurer shall make or has made any underpayment or underpayments or any overpayment or overpayments on account of any such misstatement, the amount thereof, with interest at the rate to be specified in the contract but not exceeding six percent per annum, shall, in the case of underpayment, be paid the insured or, in the case of overpayment, may be charged against the current or next succeeding payment or payments to be made by the insurer under the contract.

\[ [1982 c 181 § 12](http://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1982c181.pdf?cite=1982%20c%20181%20§%2012); 1947 c 79 § .23.18; Rem. Supp. 1947 § 45.23.18; \]

## 48.23.190 - Dividends—Annuities, pure endowments.
If such contract is participating, there shall be a provision that the insurer shall annually ascertain and apportion any divisible surplus accruing on the contract.

\[ 1947 c 79 § .23.19; Rem. Supp. 1947 § 45.23.19; \]

## 48.23.200 - Nonforfeiture benefits—Annuities, pure endowments.
Such contracts issued after the operative date of RCW 48.23.360 and individual deferred annuities issued before the operative date of RCW 48.23.420 through * 48.23.520 shall contain:

1. A provision that in the event of default in any stipulated payment, the insurer will grant a paid-up nonforfeiture benefit on a plan stipulated in the contract, effective as of such date, of such value as is hereinafter specified.

2. A statement of the mortality table and interest rate used in calculating the paid-up nonforfeiture benefit available under the contract.

3. An explanation of the manner in which the paid-up nonforfeiture benefits are altered by the existence of any paid-up additions credited to the contract or any indebtedness to the insurer on the contract.

\[ [1982 1st ex.s. c 9 § 34](http://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1982ex1c9.pdf?cite=1982%201st%20ex.s.%20c%209%20§%2034); [1979 c 157 § 3](http://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1979c157.pdf?cite=1979%20c%20157%20§%203); 1947 c 79 § .23.20; Rem. Supp. 1947 § 45.23.20; \]

## 48.23.210 - Reinstatement—Annuities, pure endowments.
In such contracts there shall be a provision that the contract may be reinstated at any time within one year from the date of default in making stipulated payments to the insurer, unless the cash surrender value has been paid, but all overdue stipulated payments and any indebtedness to the insurer on the contract shall be paid or reinstated, with interest thereon at a rate to be specified in the contract but not exceeding six percent per annum payable annually, and in cases where applicable, the insurer may also include a requirement of evidence of insurability satisfactory to the insurer.

\[ 1947 c 79 § .23.21; Rem. Supp. 1947 § 45.23.21; \]

## 48.23.220 - Standard provisions—Reversionary annuities.
No contract for a reversionary annuity shall be delivered or issued for delivery in this state unless it contains in substance each of the provisions specified in RCW 48.23.230 and 48.23.240. Any of such provisions not applicable to single premium annuities shall not, to that extent, be incorporated therein.

This section shall not apply to group annuities or to annuities included in life insurance policies.

\[ 1947 c 79 § .23.22; Rem. Supp. 1947 § 45.23.22; \]

## 48.23.230 - Sections applicable.
Any such reversionary annuity contract shall contain the provisions specified in RCW 48.23.150 to 48.23.190, inclusive, except that under RCW 48.23.150 the insurer may at its option provide for an equitable reduction of the amount of the annuity payments in settlement of an overdue or deferred payment in lieu of providing for a deduction of such payments from an amount payable upon a settlement under the contract.

\[ 1947 c 79 § .23.23; Rem. Supp. 1947 § 45.23.23; \]

## 48.23.240 - Reinstatement—Reversionary annuities.
In such reversionary annuity contracts there shall be a provision that the contract may be reinstated at any time within three years from the date of default in making stipulated payments to the insurer, upon production of evidence of insurability satisfactory to the insurer, and upon condition that all overdue payments and any indebtedness to the insurer on account of the contract be paid, or, within the limits permitted by the then cash values of the contract, reinstated, with interest as to both payments and indebtedness at a rate to be specified in the contract but not exceeding six percent per annum compounded annually.

\[ 1947 c 79 § .23.24; Rem. Supp. 1947 § 45.23.24; \]

## 48.23.250 - Supplemental benefits.
The commissioner may make reasonable rules and regulations concerning the conditions in provisions granting additional benefits in event of the insured's accidental death, or in event the insured becomes totally and permanently disabled, which are a part of or supplemental to life insurance contracts.

\[ 1947 c 79 § .23.25; Rem. Supp. 1947 § 45.23.25; \]

## 48.23.260 - Limitation of liability.
1. The insurer may in any life insurance policy or annuity or pure endowment contract limit its liability to a determinable amount not less than the full reserve of the policy and of dividend additions thereto in event only of death occurring:

    a.  As a result of war, or any act of war, declared or undeclared, or of service in the military, naval or air forces or in civilian forces auxiliary thereto, or from any cause while a member of any such military, naval or air forces of any country at war, declared or undeclared.

    b.  As a result of suicide of the insured, whether sane or insane, within two years from date of issue of the policy.

    c.  As a result of aviation under conditions specified in the policy.

2. An insurer may specify conditions pertaining to the items of subsection (1) of this section which in the commissioner's opinion are more favorable to the policyholder.

\[ 1947 c 79 § .23.26; Rem. Supp. 1947 § 45.23.26; \]

## 48.23.270 - Incontestability after reinstatement.
The reinstatement of any policy of life insurance or contract of annuity hereafter delivered or issued for delivery in this state may be contestable on account of fraud or misrepresentation of facts material to the reinstatement only for the same period following reinstatement as the policy provides with respect to contestability after original issuance.

\[ 1947 c 79 § .23.27; Rem. Supp. 1947 § 45.23.27; \]

## 48.23.290 - Premium deposits.
1. A life insurer may, under such policy provisions or agreements as have been approved by the commissioner consistent with this section, contract for and accept premium deposits in addition to the regular premiums specified in the policy, for the purpose of paying future premiums, or to facilitate conversion of the policy, or to increase the benefits thereof.

2. The unused accumulation from such deposits shall be held and accounted for as a premium deposit fund, and the policy or agreement shall provide for the manner of application of the premium deposit fund to the payment of premiums otherwise in default and for the disposition of the fund if it is not sufficient to pay the next premium.

3. Such fund shall:

    a.  Be available upon surrender of the policy, in addition to the cash surrender value; and

    b.  be payable upon the insured's death or upon maturity of the policy; and

    c.  be paid to the insured whenever the cash surrender value together with the premium deposit fund equals or exceeds the amount of insurance provided by the policy, unless the amount of the deposit does not exceed that which may be required to facilitate conversion of the policy to another plan in accordance with its terms.

4. No part of the premium deposit fund shall be paid to the insured during the continuance of the policy except at such times and in such amounts as is specified in the policy or in the deposit agreement.

\[ 1947 c 79 § .23.29; Rem. Supp. 1947 § 45.23.29; \]

## 48.23.300 - Policy settlements—Interest.
Any life insurer shall have the power to hold under agreement the proceeds of any policy issued by it, upon such terms and restrictions as to revocation by the policyholder and control by beneficiaries, and with such exemptions from the claims of creditors of beneficiaries other than the policyholder as set forth in the policy or as agreed to in writing by the insurer and the policyholder. Upon maturity of a policy in the event the policyholder has made no such agreement, the insurer shall have the power to hold the proceeds of the policy under an agreement with the beneficiaries. The insurer shall not be required to segregate funds so held but may hold them as part of its general assets.

An insurer shall pay interest on death benefits payable under the terms of a life insurance policy insuring the life of any person who was a resident of this state at the time of death. Such interest shall accrue commencing on the date of death at the rate then paid by the insurer on other withdrawable policy proceeds left with the company, but not less than eight percent. Benefits payable that have not been tendered to the beneficiary within ninety days of the receipt of proof of death shall accrue interest, commencing on the ninety-first day, at the aforementioned rate plus three percent. This section applies to death of insureds that occur on or after September 1, 1985.

\[ [1985 c 264 § 23](http://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1985c264.pdf?cite=1985%20c%20264%20§%2023); [1983 1st ex.s. c 32 § 21](http://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1983ex1c32.pdf?cite=1983%201st%20ex.s.%20c%2032%20§%2021); 1947 c 79 § .23.30; Rem. Supp. 1947 § 45.23.30; \]

## 48.23.310 - Deduction of indebtedness.
In determining the amount due under any life insurance policy heretofore or hereafter issued, deduction may be made of

1. any unpaid premiums or installments thereof for the current policy year due under the terms of the policy, and of

2. the amount of principal and accrued interest of any policy loan or other indebtedness against the policy then remaining unpaid, such principal increased by unpaid interest and compounded as provided in this chapter.

\[ 1947 c 79 § .23.31; Rem. Supp. 1947 § 45.23.31; \]

## 48.23.320 - Miscellaneous proceeds.
Upon the death of the insured and except as is otherwise expressly provided by the policy or premium deposit agreement, a life insurer may pay to the surviving spouse, children, beneficiary, or other person other than the insured's estate, appearing to the insurer to be equitably entitled thereto, sums held by it and comprising:

1. Premiums paid in advance, and which premiums did not fall due prior to such death, or funds held on deposit for the payment of future premiums.

2. Dividends theretofore declared on the policy and held by the insurer under the insured's option.

3. Dividends becoming payable on or after the death of the insured.

\[ 1947 c 79 § .23.32; Rem. Supp. 1947 § 45.23.32; \]

## 48.23.330 - Trafficking in dividend rights.
No life insurer nor any of its representatives, agents, or affiliates, shall buy, take by assignment other than in connection with policy loans, or otherwise deal or traffic in any rights to dividends existing under participating life insurance policies issued by the insurer.

\[ 1947 c 79 § .23.33; Rem. Supp. 1947 § 45.23.33; \]

## 48.23.340 - Prohibited policy plans.
No life insurer shall hereafter issue for delivery or deliver in this state any life insurance policy:

1. Issued under any plan for the segregation of policyholders into mathematical groups and providing benefits for a surviving policyholder of a group arising out of the death of another policyholder of such group, or under any other similar plan.

2. Providing benefits or values for surviving or continuing policyholders contingent upon the lapse or termination of the policies of other policyholders, whether by death or otherwise.

\[ 1947 c 79 § .23.34; Rem. Supp. 1947 § 45.23.34; \]

## 48.23.345 - Juvenile life insurance—Speculative or fraudulent purposes.
Life insurers shall develop and implement underwriting standards and procedures designed to detect and prevent the purchase of juvenile life insurance for speculative or fraudulent purposes. These standards and procedures shall be made available for review by the commissioner.

Life insurers shall maintain records of underwriting rejections of applications for life insurance on juvenile lives for a period of ten years.

\[ [2001 c 197 § 1](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/2001-02/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/House/1661-S.SL.pdf?cite=2001%20c%20197%20§%201); \]

## 48.23.360 - Calculation of nonforfeiture benefits under annuities.
1. Nonforfeiture benefits: Any paid-up nonforfeiture benefit available under any annuity or pure endowment contract pursuant to RCW 48.23.200, in the event of default in a consideration due on any contract anniversary shall be such that its present value as of such anniversary shall be not less than the excess, if any, of the present value, on such anniversary, of the future guaranteed benefits (excluding any total disability benefits attached to such contracts) which would have been provided for by the contract including any existing paid-up additions, if there had been no default, over the sum of (a) the then present value of the net consideration defined in subsection (2) of this section corresponding to considerations which would have fallen due on and after such anniversary, and (b) the amount of any indebtedness to the company on the contract, including interest due or accrued. In determining the benefits referred to in this section and in calculating the net consideration referred to in such subsection (2), in the case of annuity contracts under which an election may be made to have annuity payments commence at optional dates, the annuity payments shall be deemed to commence at the latest date permitted by the contract for the commencement of such payments and the considerations shall be deemed to be payable until such date, which, however, shall not be later than the contract anniversary nearest the annuitant's seventieth birthday.

2. Net considerations: The net considerations for any annuity or pure endowment contract referred to in subsection (1) of this section shall be calculated on an annual basis, shall be such that the present value thereof at date of issue of the annuity shall equal the then present value of the future benefits thereunder (excluding any total disability benefits attached to such contracts) and shall be not less than the following percentages of the respective considerations specified in the contracts for the respective contract years:

First year. . . . fifty percent

Second and subsequent years. . . .ninety percent

PROVIDED, That in the case of participating annuity contracts the percentages hereinbefore specified may be decreased by five.

3. Basis of calculation: All net considerations and present values for such contracts referred to in this section shall be calculated on the basis of the 1937 Standard Annuity Mortality Table or, at the option of the insurer, the Annuity Mortality Table for 1949, Ultimate, or any modification of either of these tables approved by the commissioner, and the rate of interest, not exceeding three and one-half percent per annum, specified in the contract for calculating cash surrender values, if any, and paid-up nonforfeiture benefits; except that with respect to annuity and pure endowment contracts issued on or after the operative date of *RCW 48.12.150(3)(b)(ii) for such contracts, such rate of interest may be as high as four percent per annum: PROVIDED, That if such rate of interest exceeds three and one-half percent per annum, all net considerations and present values for such contracts referred to in this section shall be calculated on the 1971 Individual Annuity Mortality Table, or any modification of this table approved by the commissioner.

4. Calculations on default: Any cash surrender value and any paid-up nonforfeiture benefit, available under any such contract in the event of default in the payment of any consideration due at any time other than on the contract anniversary, shall be calculated with allowance for the lapse of time and the payment of fractional considerations beyond the last preceding contract anniversary. All values herein referred to may be calculated upon the assumption that any death benefit is payable at the end of the contract year of death.

5. Deferment of payment: If an insurer provides for the payment of a cash surrender value, it shall reserve the right to defer the payment of such value for a period of six months after demand therefor with surrender of the contract.

6. Lump sum in lieu: Notwithstanding the requirements of this section, any deferred annuity contract may provide that if the annuity allowed under any paid-up nonforfeiture benefit would be less than one hundred twenty dollars annually, the insurer may at its option grant a cash surrender value in lieu of such paid-up nonforfeiture benefit of such amount as may be required by subsection (3) of this section.

7. Operative date: If no election is made by an insurer for an operative date prior to July 1, 1948, such date shall be the operative date for this section.

\[ [1973 1st ex.s. c 162 § 6](http://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1973ex1c162.pdf?cite=1973%201st%20ex.s.%20c%20162%20§%206); [1951 c 190 § 1](http://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1951c190.pdf?cite=1951%20c%20190%20§%201); 1947 c 79 § .23.36; Rem. Supp. 1947 § 45.23.36; \]

## 48.23.370 - Duties of insurer issuing both participating and nonparticipating policies—Rules.
1. A life insurer issuing both participating and nonparticipating policies shall maintain records which segregate the participating from the nonparticipating business and clearly show the profits and losses upon each such category of business.

2. For the purposes of such accounting the insurer shall make a reasonable allocation as between the respective such categories of the expenses of such general operations or functions as are jointly shared. Any allocation of expense as between the respective categories shall be made upon a reasonable basis, to the end that each category shall bear a just portion of joint expense involved in the administration of the business of such category.

3. No policy hereafter delivered or issued for delivery in this state shall provide for, and no life insurer or representative shall hereafter knowingly offer or promise payment, credit or distribution of participating "dividends," "earnings," "profits," or "savings," by whatever name called, to participating policies out of such profits, earnings or savings on nonparticipating policies.

4. The commissioner may promulgate rules for the purpose of assuring the equitable treatment of all policyholders so that one group of policyholders shall not support or be supported by another group of policyholders.

\[ [1982 c 181 § 13](http://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1982c181.pdf?cite=1982%20c%20181%20§%2013); [1965 ex.s. c 70 § 22](http://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1965ex1c70.pdf?cite=1965%20ex.s.%20c%2070%20§%2022); \]

## 48.23.380 - Return of policy and refund of premium—Grace period—Notice—Effect.
1. Every individual life insurance policy issued after September 1, 1977, shall have printed on its face or attached thereto a notice stating in substance that the policy owner shall be permitted to return the policy within ten days after it is received by the policy owner and to have the premium paid refunded if, after examination of the policy, the policy owner is not satisfied with it for any reason. An additional ten percent penalty shall be added to any premium refund due which is not paid within thirty days of return of the policy to the insurer or insurance producer. If a policy owner pursuant to such notice, returns the policy to the insurer at its home or branch office or to the insurance producer through whom it was purchased, it shall be void from the beginning and the parties shall be in the same position as if no policy had been issued.

2. This section shall not apply to individual life insurance policies issued in connection with a credit transaction or issued under a contractual policy change or conversion privilege provision contained in a policy.

3. No later than January 1, 2010, or when the insurer has used all of its existing paper individual life insurance policy forms which were in its possession on July 1, 2009, whichever is earlier, the notice required by subsection (1) of this section shall use the term insurance producer in place of agent.

\[ [2008 c 217 § 26](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/2007-08/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/Senate/6591.SL.pdf?cite=2008%20c%20217%20§%2026); [1983 1st ex.s. c 32 § 10](http://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1983ex1c32.pdf?cite=1983%201st%20ex.s.%20c%2032%20§%2010); [1977 c 60 § 1](http://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1977c60.pdf?cite=1977%20c%2060%20§%201); \]

## 48.23.410 - Short title.
RCW 48.23.420 through * 48.23.520 shall be known as the standard nonforfeiture law for individual deferred annuities.

\[ [1982 1st ex.s. c 9 § 21](http://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1982ex1c9.pdf?cite=1982%201st%20ex.s.%20c%209%20§%2021); \]

## 48.23.420 - Inapplicability of enumerated sections to certain policies.
RCW 48.23.420 through * 48.23.520 do not apply to any reinsurance; group annuity purchased under a retirement plan or plan of deferred compensation established or maintained by an employer (including a partnership or sole proprietorship) or by an employee organization, or by both, other than a plan providing individual retirement accounts or individual retirement annuities under Section 408 of the Internal Revenue Code, as now or hereafter amended; premium deposit fund; variable annuity; investment annuity; immediate annuity; any deferred annuity contract after annuity payments have commenced; or reversionary annuity; nor to any contract which is delivered outside this state through an insurance producer or other representative of the company issuing the contract.

\[ [2008 c 217 § 27](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/2007-08/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/Senate/6591.SL.pdf?cite=2008%20c%20217%20§%2027); [1982 1st ex.s. c 9 § 22](http://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1982ex1c9.pdf?cite=1982%201st%20ex.s.%20c%209%20§%2022); \]

## 48.23.430 - Paid-up annuity and cash surrender provisions required.
In the case of contracts issued on or after the operative date of this section as defined in *RCW 48.23.520, no contract of annuity, except as stated in RCW 48.23.420, may be delivered or issued for delivery in this state unless it contains in substance the following provisions, or corresponding provisions which in the opinion of the commissioner are at least as favorable to the contract holder, upon cessation of payment of considerations under the contract:

1. That upon cessation of payment of considerations under a contract, or upon the written request of the contract owner, the company shall grant a paid-up annuity benefit on a plan stipulated in the contract of such value as is specified in RCW 48.23.450, 48.23.460, 48.23.470, 48.23.480, and 48.23.500;

2. If a contract provides for a lump sum settlement at maturity, or at any other time, that upon surrender of the contract at or before the commencement of any annuity payments, the company shall pay in lieu of any paid-up annuity benefit a cash surrender benefit of such amount as is specified in RCW 48.23.450, 48.23.460, 48.23.480, and 48.23.500. The company may reserve the right to defer the payment of such cash surrender benefit for a period not to exceed six months after demand therefor with surrender of the contract after making written request and receiving written approval of the commissioner. The request shall address the necessity and equitability to all policyholders of the deferral;

3. A statement of the mortality table, if any, and interest rates used in calculating any minimum paid-up annuity, cash surrender, or death benefits that are guaranteed under the contract, together with sufficient information to determine the amounts of such benefits; and

4. A statement that any paid-up annuity, cash surrender, or death benefits that may be available under the contract are not less than the minimum benefits required by any statute of the state in which the contract is delivered and an explanation of the manner in which such benefits are altered by the existence of any additional amounts credited by the company to the contract, any indebtedness to the company on the contract, or any prior withdrawals from or partial surrenders of the contract.

Notwithstanding the requirements of this section, any deferred annuity contract may provide that if no considerations have been received under a contract for a period of two full years and the portion of the paid-up annuity benefit at maturity on the plan stipulated in the contract arising from considerations paid before such period would be less than twenty dollars monthly, the company may at its option terminate the contract by payment in cash of the then present value of the portion of the paid-up annuity benefit, calculated on the basis of the mortality table, if any, and interest rate specified in the contract for determining the paid-up annuity benefit, and by such payment is relieved of any further obligation under such contract.

\[ [2004 c 91 § 1](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/2003-04/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/Senate/5793-S2.SL.pdf?cite=2004%20c%2091%20§%201); [1982 1st ex.s. c 9 § 23](http://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1982ex1c9.pdf?cite=1982%201st%20ex.s.%20c%209%20§%2023); \]

## 48.23.440 - Minimum nonforfeiture amounts.
The minimum values as specified in RCW 48.23.450, 48.23.460, 48.23.470, 48.23.480, and 48.23.500 of any paid-up annuity, cash surrender, or death benefits available under an annuity contract shall be based upon minimum nonforfeiture amounts as defined in this section.

1. The minimum nonforfeiture amount at any time at or prior to the commencement of any annuity payments is equal to an accumulation up to such time at rates of interest as indicated in subsection (2) of this section of the net considerations, as defined in this subsection, paid prior to such time, decreased by the sum of the following:

    a.  Any prior withdrawals from or partial surrenders of the contract accumulated at rates of interest as indicated in subsection (2) of this section; 

    b.  An annual contract charge of fifty dollars, accumulated at rates of interest as indicated in subsection (2) of this section;

    c.  Any premium tax paid by the insurer for the contract, accumulated at rates of interest as indicated in subsection (2) of this section; and

    d.  The amount of any indebtedness to the company on the contract, including interest due and accrued.

The net considerations for a given contract year used to define the minimum nonforfeiture amount shall be an amount equal to eighty-seven and one-half percent of the gross considerations credited to the contract during that contract year.

2. The interest rate used in determining minimum nonforfeiture amounts shall be an annual rate of interest determined as the lesser of three percent per annum and the following, which shall be specified in the contract if the interest rate will be reset:

    a.  The five-year constant maturity treasury rate reported by the federal reserve as of a date certain, or averaged over a period, rounded to the nearest one-twentieth of one percent, specified in the contract no longer than fifteen months prior to the contract issue date or redetermination date under (d) of this subsection;

    b.  Reduced by one hundred twenty-five basis points;

    c.  Where the resulting interest rate is not less than one percent; and

    d.  The interest rate shall apply to an initial period and may be redetermined for additional periods. The redetermination date, basis, and period, if any, shall be stated in the contract. The basis is the date or average over a specified period that produces the value of the five-year constant maturity treasury rate to be used at each redetermination date.

3. During the period or term that a contract provides substantive participation in an equity indexed benefit, it may increase the reduction described in subsection (2)(b) of this section by up to an additional one hundred basis points to reflect the value of the equity index benefit. The present value at the contract issue date, and at each redetermination date thereafter, of the additional reduction may not exceed the market value of the benefit. The commissioner may require a demonstration that the present value of the additional reduction does not exceed the market value of the benefit. If a demonstration is not acceptable to the commissioner, the commissioner may disallow or limit the additional reduction.

4. The commissioner may adopt rules to implement subsection (3) of this section and to provide for further adjustments to the calculation of minimum nonforfeiture amounts for contracts that provide substantive participation in an equity index benefit and for other policies that the commissioner determines justify an adjustment.

5. Before January 1, 2006, an insurer may issue an annuity policy under this section as in effect on December 31, 2003; or issue an annuity policy under this section as in effect on July 1, 2004. On or after January 1, 2006, an insurer must issue an annuity policy under this section as in effect on or after July 1, 2004.

\[ [2004 c 91 § 2](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/2003-04/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/Senate/5793-S2.SL.pdf?cite=2004%20c%2091%20§%202); [1982 1st ex.s. c 9 § 24](http://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1982ex1c9.pdf?cite=1982%201st%20ex.s.%20c%209%20§%2024); \]

## 48.23.450 - Minimum present value of paid-up annuity benefit.
Any paid-up annuity benefit available under a contract shall be such that its present value on the date annuity payments are to commence is at least equal to the minimum nonforfeiture amount on that date. Such present value shall be computed using the mortality table, if any, and the interest rate specified in the contract for determining the minimum paid-up annuity benefits guaranteed in the contract.

\[ [1982 1st ex.s. c 9 § 25](http://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1982ex1c9.pdf?cite=1982%201st%20ex.s.%20c%209%20§%2025); \]

## 48.23.460 - Minimum cash surrender benefits—Death benefit.
For contracts which provide cash surrender benefits, such cash surrender benefits available before maturity shall not be less than the present value as of the date of surrender of that portion of the maturity value of the paid-up annuity benefit which would be provided under the contract at maturity arising from considerations paid prior to the time of cash surrender reduced by the amount appropriate to reflect any prior withdrawals from or partial surrenders of the contract, such present value being calculated on the basis of an interest rate not more than one percent higher than the interest rate specified in the contract for accumulating the net considerations to determine such maturity value, decreased by the amount of any indebtedness to the company on the contract, including interest due and accrued, and increased by any existing additional amounts credited by the company to the contract. In no event may any cash surrender benefit be less than the minimum nonforfeiture amount at that time. The death benefit under such contracts shall be at least equal to the cash surrender benefit.

\[ [1982 1st ex.s. c 9 § 26](http://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1982ex1c9.pdf?cite=1982%201st%20ex.s.%20c%209%20§%2026); \]

## 48.23.470 - Contracts without cash surrender, death benefits—Minimum present value of paid-up annuity benefits.
For contracts which do not provide cash surrender benefits, the present value of any paid-up annuity benefit available as a nonforfeiture option at any time prior to maturity shall not be less than the present value of that portion of the maturity value of the paid-up annuity benefit provided under the contract arising from considerations paid before the time the contract is surrendered in exchange for, or changed to, a deferred paid-up annuity, such present value being calculated for the period prior to the maturity date on the basis of the interest rate specified in the contract for accumulating the net considerations to determine such maturity value, and increased by any existing additional amounts credited by the company to the contract. For contracts which do not provide any death benefits prior to the commencement of any annuity payments, such present values shall be calculated on the basis of such interest rate and the mortality table specified in the contract for determining the maturity value of the paid-up annuity benefit. However, in no event may the present value of a paid-up annuity benefit be less than the minimum nonforfeiture amount at that time.

\[ [1982 1st ex.s. c 9 § 27](http://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1982ex1c9.pdf?cite=1982%201st%20ex.s.%20c%209%20§%2027); \]

## 48.23.480 - Optional maturity dates.
For the purpose of determining the benefits calculated under RCW 48.23.460 and 48.23.470, in the case of annuity contracts under which an election may be made to have annuity payments commence at optional maturity dates, the maturity date shall be deemed to be the latest date for which election is permitted by the contract, but shall not be deemed to be later than the anniversary of the contract next following the annuitant's seventieth birthday or the tenth anniversary of the contract, whichever is later.

\[ [1982 1st ex.s. c 9 § 28](http://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1982ex1c9.pdf?cite=1982%201st%20ex.s.%20c%209%20§%2028); \]

## 48.23.490 - Statement required in contract without cash surrender or death benefits.
Any contract which does not provide cash surrender benefits or does not provide death benefits at least equal to the minimum nonforfeiture amount prior to the commencement of any annuity payments shall include a statement in a prominent place in the contract that such benefits are not provided.

\[ [1982 1st ex.s. c 9 § 29](http://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1982ex1c9.pdf?cite=1982%201st%20ex.s.%20c%209%20§%2029); \]

## 48.23.500 - Calculation of benefits available other than on contract anniversary.
Any paid-up annuity, cash surrender, or death benefits available at any time, other than on the contract anniversary under any contract with fixed scheduled considerations, shall be calculated with allowance for the lapse of time and the payment of any scheduled considerations beyond the beginning of the contract year in which cessation of payment of considerations under the contract occurs.

\[ [1982 1st ex.s. c 9 § 30](http://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1982ex1c9.pdf?cite=1982%201st%20ex.s.%20c%209%20§%2030); \]

## 48.23.510 - Additional benefits.
For any contract which provides, within the same contract by rider or supplemental contract provision, both annuity benefits and life insurance benefits that are in excess of the greater of cash surrender benefits or a return of the gross considerations with interest, the minimum nonforfeiture benefits shall be equal to the sum of the minimum nonforfeiture benefits for the annuity portion and the minimum nonforfeiture benefits, if any, for the life insurance portion computed as if each portion were a separate contract. Notwithstanding the provisions of RCW 48.23.450, 48.23.460, 48.23.470, 48.23.480, and 48.23.500, additional benefits payable (1) in the event of total and permanent disability, (2) as reversionary annuity or deferred reversionary annuity benefits, or (3) as other policy benefits additional to life insurance, endowment, and annuity benefits, and considerations for all such additional benefits, shall be disregarded in ascertaining the minimum nonforfeiture amounts, paid-up annuity, or cash surrender and death benefits that may be required by RCW 48.23.410 through * 48.23.520. The inclusion of such additional benefits shall not be required in any paid-up benefits, unless such additional benefits separately would require minimum nonforfeiture amounts, paid-up annuity, or cash surrender and death benefits.

\[ [1982 1st ex.s. c 9 § 31](http://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1982ex1c9.pdf?cite=1982%201st%20ex.s.%20c%209%20§%2031); \]

## 48.23.525 - Individual life insurance—Noninsurance benefits—Rules.
1. A life insurer may include the following noninsurance benefits as part of a policy of individual life insurance, with the prior approval of the commissioner:

    a.  Will preparation services;

    b.  Financial planning and estate planning services;

    c.  Probate and estate settlement services;

    d.  Products or services related to any policy of individual life insurance that are intended to incent behavioral changes that improve the health and reduce the risk of death of the insured; and

    e.  Such other services as the commissioner may identify by rule.

2. For products and services referenced in subsection (1)(d) of this section, the commissioner may adopt rules that include minimum product or service standards to protect policyholder privacy rights; establish standards for ensuring that incentives, in the aggregate, are directed to sharing the benefit of improving risk experience; and implement consumer protection design and administration of such product or service.

3. The commissioner may adopt rules to ensure disclosure of the noninsurance benefits permitted under this section, including but not limited to guidelines concerning the provision of the coverage.

4. Those providing the services listed in subsection (1) of this section must be appropriately licensed.

5. This section does not require the commissioner to approve any particular proposed noninsurance benefit. The commissioner may disapprove any proposed noninsurance benefit that the commissioner determines may tend to promote or facilitate the violation of any other section of this title.

6. This section does not expand, limit, or otherwise affect the authority and ethical obligations of those who are authorized by the state supreme court to practice law in this state. This section does not limit the prohibition against the unauthorized practice of law under chapter 2.48 RCW.

7. This section does not affect the application of chapter 21.20 RCW.

\[ [2020 c 197 § 4](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/2019-20/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/Senate/6052-S.SL.pdf?cite=2020%20c%20197%20§%204); [2009 c 76 § 1](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/2009-10/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/House/1202-S.SL.pdf?cite=2009%20c%2076%20§%201); \]

## 48.23.900 - Construction—Chapter applicable to state registered domestic partnerships—2009 c 521.
For the purposes of this chapter, the terms spouse, marriage, marital, husband, wife, widow, widower, next of kin, and family shall be interpreted as applying equally to state registered domestic partnerships or individuals in state registered domestic partnerships as well as to marital relationships and married persons, and references to dissolution of marriage shall apply equally to state registered domestic partnerships that have been terminated, dissolved, or invalidated, to the extent that such interpretation does not conflict with federal law. Where necessary to implement chapter 521, Laws of 2009, gender-specific terms such as husband and wife used in any statute, rule, or other law shall be construed to be gender neutral, and applicable to individuals in state registered domestic partnerships.

\[ [2009 c 521 § 119](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/2009-10/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/Senate/5688-S2.SL.pdf?cite=2009%20c%20521%20§%20119); \]

