# 48.62 - Local government insurance transactions.
* [48.62.011 - Legislative intent—Construction.](#4862011---legislative-intentconstruction)
* [48.62.021 - Definitions. (Effective until January 1, 2022.)](#4862021---definitions-effective-until-january-1-2022)
* [48.62.031 - Authority to self-insure—Options—Risk manager.](#4862031---authority-to-self-insureoptionsrisk-manager)
* [48.62.034 - Joint self-insurance program—Actions authorized.](#4862034---joint-self-insurance-programactions-authorized)
* [48.62.037 - Board of pilotage commissioners—Participation in joint self-insurance program—Liability insurance coverage.](#4862037---board-of-pilotage-commissionersparticipation-in-joint-self-insurance-programliability-insurance-coverage)
* [48.62.061 - Rule making by state risk manager—Standards.](#4862061---rule-making-by-state-risk-managerstandards)
* [48.62.071 - Program approval required—State risk manager—Plan of management and operation.](#4862071---program-approval-requiredstate-risk-managerplan-of-management-and-operation)
* [48.62.081 - Multistate program participants—Requirements.](#4862081---multistate-program-participantsrequirements)
* [48.62.091 - Program approval or disapproval—Procedures—Annual report.](#4862091---program-approval-or-disapprovalproceduresannual-report)
* [48.62.101 - Access to information—Executive sessions—Public records act.](#4862101---access-to-informationexecutive-sessionspublic-records-act)
* [48.62.111 - Investments—Designated treasurer—Deposit requirements—Bond.](#4862111---investmentsdesignated-treasurerdeposit-requirementsbond)
* [48.62.121 - General operating regulations—Employee remuneration—Governing control—School districts—Use of insurance producers and surplus line brokers—Health care services—Trusts.](#4862121---general-operating-regulationsemployee-remunerationgoverning-controlschool-districtsuse-of-insurance-producers-and-surplus-line-brokershealth-care-servicestrusts)
* [48.62.123 - Existing benefit program established as a trust—Risk manager—Limited extension of deadline for compliance.](#4862123---existing-benefit-program-established-as-a-trustrisk-managerlimited-extension-of-deadline-for-compliance)
* [48.62.125 - Educational service districts—Rules—Superintendent of public instruction.](#4862125---educational-service-districtsrulessuperintendent-of-public-instruction)
* [48.62.131 - Preexisting programs—Notice to state auditor.](#4862131---preexisting-programsnotice-to-state-auditor)
* [48.62.141 - Insufficient assets—Program requirement.](#4862141---insufficient-assetsprogram-requirement)
* [48.62.151 - Insurance premium taxes—Exemption.](#4862151---insurance-premium-taxesexemption)
* [48.62.161 - Establishment of fee to cover costs—State risk manager.](#4862161---establishment-of-fee-to-cover-costsstate-risk-manager)
* [48.62.171 - Dissemination of information—Civil immunity.](#4862171---dissemination-of-informationcivil-immunity)
* [48.62.900 - Effective date, implementation, application—1991 sp.s. c 30.](#4862900---effective-date-implementation-application1991-sps-c-30)
## 48.62.011 - Legislative intent—Construction.
1. This chapter is intended to provide the exclusive source of local government entity authority to individually or jointly self-insure risks, jointly purchase insurance or reinsurance, and to contract for risk management, claims, and administrative services. This chapter shall be liberally construed to grant local government entities maximum flexibility in self-insuring to the extent the self-insurance programs are operated in a safe and sound manner. This chapter is intended to require prior approval for the establishment of every individual local government self-insured employee health and welfare benefit program and every joint local government self-insurance program. In addition, this chapter is intended to require every local government entity that establishes a self-insurance program not subject to prior approval to notify the state of the existence of the program and to comply with the regulatory and statutory standards governing the management and operation of the programs as provided in this chapter. This chapter is not intended to authorize or regulate self-insurance of unemployment compensation under chapter 50.44 RCW, or industrial insurance under chapter 51.14 RCW.

2. This chapter is further intended to enable the board of pilotage commissioners to participate in a local government joint self-insurance program covering liability risks.

\[ [2019 c 26 § 1](https://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/2019-20/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/House/1431.SL.pdf?cite=2019%20c%2026%20§%201); [1991 sp.s. c 30 § 1](https://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/1991-92/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/House/1907-S.SL.pdf?cite=1991%20sp.s.%20c%2030%20§%201); \]

## 48.62.021 - Definitions. (Effective until January 1, 2022.)
Unless the context clearly requires otherwise, the definitions in this section apply throughout this chapter.

1. "Health and welfare benefits" means a plan or program established by a local government entity or entities for the purpose of providing its employees and their dependents, and in the case of school districts, its district employees, students, directors, or any of their dependents, with health care, accident, disability, death, and salary protection benefits.

2. "Local government entity" or "entity" means every unit of local government, both general purpose and special purpose, and includes, but is not limited to, counties, cities, towns, port districts, public utility districts, water-sewer districts, school districts, fire protection districts, irrigation districts, metropolitan municipal corporations, conservation districts, and other political subdivisions, governmental subdivisions, municipal corporations, quasi-municipal corporations, nonprofit corporations comprised of only units of local government, or a group comprised of local governments joined by an interlocal agreement authorized by chapter 39.34 RCW.

3. "Nonprofit corporation" or "corporation" has the same meaning as defined in *RCW 24.03.005(3) or a similar statute with similar intent within the entity’s state of domicile.

4. "Property and liability risks" includes the risk of property damage or loss sustained by a local government entity and the risk of claims arising from the tortious or negligent conduct or any error or omission of the local government entity, its officers, employees, agents, or volunteers as a result of which a claim may be made against the local government entity.

5. "Risk assumption" means a decision to absorb the entity's financial exposure to a risk of loss without the creation of a formal program of advance funding of anticipated losses.

6. "Self-insurance" means a formal program of advance funding and management of entity financial exposure to a risk of loss that is not transferred through the purchase of an insurance policy or contract.

7. "State risk manager" means the risk manager of the office of risk management within the department of enterprise services.

\[ [2015 c 109 § 2](https://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/2015-16/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/Senate/5119.SL.pdf?cite=2015%20c%20109%20§%202); [2011 1st sp.s. c 43 § 520](https://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/2011-12/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/Senate/5931-S.SL.pdf?cite=2011%201st%20sp.s.%20c%2043%20§%20520); [2004 c 255 § 2](https://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/2003-04/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/Senate/5869.SL.pdf?cite=2004%20c%20255%20§%202); [2002 c 332 § 24](https://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/2001-02/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/House/2352.SL.pdf?cite=2002%20c%20332%20§%2024); [1999 c 153 § 60](https://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/1999-00/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/House/1264.SL.pdf?cite=1999%20c%20153%20§%2060); [1991 sp.s. c 30 § 2](https://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/1991-92/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/House/1907-S.SL.pdf?cite=1991%20sp.s.%20c%2030%20§%202); \]

## 48.62.031 - Authority to self-insure—Options—Risk manager.
1. The governing body of a local government entity may individually self-insure, may join or form a self-insurance program together with other entities, including the board of pilotage commissioners, and may jointly purchase insurance or reinsurance with those other entities for property and liability risks, and health and welfare benefits only as permitted under this chapter. In addition, the entity or entities may contract for or hire personnel to provide risk management, claims, and administrative services in accordance with this chapter.

2. The agreement to form a joint self-insurance program shall be made under chapter 39.34 RCW and may create a separate legal or administrative entity with powers delegated thereto.

3. Every individual and joint self-insurance program is subject to audit by the state auditor.

4. If provided for in the agreement or contract established under chapter 39.34 RCW, a joint self-insurance program may, in conformance with this chapter:

   a. Contract or otherwise provide for risk management and loss control services;

   b. Contract or otherwise provide legal counsel for the defense of claims and other legal services;

   c. Consult with the state insurance commissioner and the state risk manager;

   d. Jointly purchase insurance and reinsurance coverage in such form and amount as the program's participants agree by contract;

   e. Obligate the program's participants to pledge revenues or contribute money to secure the obligations or pay the expenses of the program, including the establishment of a reserve or fund for coverage; and

   f. Possess any other powers and perform all other functions reasonably necessary to carry out the purposes of this chapter.

5. A self-insurance program formed and governed under this chapter that has decided to assume a risk of loss must have available for inspection by the state auditor a written report indicating the class of risk or risks the governing body of the entity has decided to assume.

6. Every joint self-insurance program governed by this chapter shall appoint the risk manager as its attorney to receive service of, and upon whom shall be served, all legal process issued against it in this state upon causes of action arising in this state.

   a. Service upon the risk manager as attorney shall constitute service upon the program. Service upon joint insurance programs subject to chapter 30, Laws of 1991 sp. sess. can be had only by service upon the risk manager. At the time of service, the plaintiff shall pay to the risk manager a fee to be set by the risk manager, taxable as costs in the action.

   b. With the initial filing for approval with the risk manager, each joint self-insurance program shall designate by name and address the person to whom the risk manager shall forward legal process so served upon him or her. The joint self-insurance program may change such person by filing a new designation.

   c. The appointment of the risk manager as attorney shall be irrevocable, shall bind any successor in interest or to the assets or liabilities of the joint self-insurance program, and shall remain in effect as long as there is in force in this state any contract made by the joint self-insurance program or liabilities or duties arising therefrom.

   d. The risk manager shall keep a record of the day and hour of service upon him or her of all legal process. A copy of the process, by registered mail with return receipt requested, shall be sent by the risk manager, to the person designated for the purpose by the joint self-insurance program in its most recent such designation filed with the risk manager. No proceedings shall be had against the joint self-insurance program, and the program shall not be required to appear, plead, or answer, until the expiration of forty days after the date of service upon the risk manager.

\[ [2019 c 26 § 3](https://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/2019-20/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/House/1431.SL.pdf?cite=2019%20c%2026%20§%203); [2015 c 109 § 3](https://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/2015-16/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/Senate/5119.SL.pdf?cite=2015%20c%20109%20§%203); [2005 c 147 § 1](https://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/2005-06/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/House/1356.SL.pdf?cite=2005%20c%20147%20§%201); [1991 sp.s. c 30 § 3](https://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/1991-92/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/House/1907-S.SL.pdf?cite=1991%20sp.s.%20c%2030%20§%203); \]

## 48.62.034 - Joint self-insurance program—Actions authorized.
1. For the purpose of carrying out a joint self-insurance program, a joint self-insurance program and a separate legal entity created under RCW 48.62.031 each may:

   a. Contract indebtedness and issue and sell revenue bonds evidencing such indebtedness or establish lines of credit pursuant to and in the manner provided for local governments in chapter 39.46 RCW with the joint board under RCW 39.34.030; board of directors under RCW 48.62.081; or governing board of a separate legal entity formed under RCW 48.62.031, performing the functions to be performed by the governing body of a local government under chapter 39.46 RCW and appointing a treasurer to perform the functions to be performed by the treasurer under chapter 39.46 RCW;

   b. Contract indebtedness and issue and sell short-term obligations evidencing such indebtedness pursuant to and in the manner provided for municipal corporations in chapter 39.50 RCW with the joint board under RCW 39.34.030; board of directors under RCW 48.62.081; or governing board of a separate legal entity formed under RCW 48.62.031, performing the functions to be performed by the governing body of a municipal corporation under chapter 39.50 RCW; and

   c. Contract indebtedness and issue and sell refunding bonds pursuant to and in the manner provided for public bodies in chapter 39.53 RCW with the joint board under RCW 39.34.030; board of directors under RCW 48.62.081; or governing board of a separate legal entity formed under RCW 48.62.031, performing the functions to be performed by the governing body of a public body under chapter 39.53 RCW.

2. For the purpose of carrying out a joint self-insurance program, a joint self-insurance program and a separate legal entity formed under RCW 48.62.031 each may make loans of the proceeds of revenue bonds issued under this section to a joint self-insurance program or a local government entity that has joined or formed a joint self-insurance program.

3. For the purpose of carrying out a joint self-insurance program, a joint self-insurance program and each local government entity that has joined or formed a joint self-insurance program may accept loans of the proceeds of revenue bonds issued under this section.

\[ [2005 c 147 § 2](https://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/2005-06/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/House/1356.SL.pdf?cite=2005%20c%20147%20§%202); \]

## 48.62.037 - Board of pilotage commissioners—Participation in joint self-insurance program—Liability insurance coverage.
The board of pilotage commissioners may participate in a local government joint self-insurance program formed or operating in accordance with this chapter. The board of pilotage commissioners may participate in the program to obtain liability insurance coverage, but not property insurance coverage.

\[ [2019 c 26 § 2](https://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/2019-20/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/House/1431.SL.pdf?cite=2019%20c%2026%20§%202); \]

## 48.62.061 - Rule making by state risk manager—Standards.
The state risk manager shall adopt rules governing the management and operation of both individual and joint local government self-insurance programs covering property or liability risks. The state risk manager shall also adopt rules governing the management and operation of both individual and joint local government self-insured health and welfare benefits programs. All rules shall be appropriate for the type of program and class of risk covered. The state risk manager's rules shall include:

1. Standards for the management, operation, and solvency of self-insurance programs, including the necessity and frequency of actuarial analyses and claims audits;

2. Standards for claims management procedures; and

3. Standards for contracts between self-insurance programs and private businesses including standards for contracts between third-party administrators and programs.

\[ [2010 1st sp.s. c 7 § 55](https://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/2009-10/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/House/2617-S2.SL.pdf?cite=2010%201st%20sp.s.%20c%207%20§%2055); [1991 sp.s. c 30 § 6](https://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/1991-92/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/House/1907-S.SL.pdf?cite=1991%20sp.s.%20c%2030%20§%206); \]

## 48.62.071 - Program approval required—State risk manager—Plan of management and operation.
Before the establishment of a joint self-insurance program covering property or liability risks by local government entities, or an individual or joint local government self-insured health and welfare benefits program, the entity or entities must obtain the approval of the state risk manager. Risk manager approval is not required for the establishment of an individual local government self-insurance program covering property or liability risks. The entity or entities proposing creation of a self-insurance program requiring prior approval shall submit a plan of management and operation to the state risk manager and the state auditor that provides at least the following information:

1. The risk or risks to be covered, including any coverage definitions, terms, conditions, and limitations or in the case of health and welfare benefits programs, the benefits to be provided, including any benefit definitions, terms, conditions, and limitations;

2. The amount and method of financing the benefits or covered risks, including the initial capital and proposed rates and projected premiums;

3. The proposed claim reserving practices;

4. The proposed purchase and maintenance of insurance or reinsurance in excess of the amounts retained by the self-insurance program;

5. In the case of a joint program, the legal form of the program, including but not limited to any bylaws, charter, or trust agreement;

6. In the case of a joint program, the agreements with members of the program defining the responsibilities and benefits of each member and management;

7. The proposed accounting, depositing, and investment practices of the program;

8. The proposed time when actuarial analysis will be first conducted and the frequency of future actuarial analysis;

9. A designation of the individual upon whom service of process shall be executed on behalf of the program. In the case of a joint program, a designation of the individual to whom service of process shall be forwarded by the risk manager on behalf of the program;

10. All contracts between the program and private persons providing risk management, claims, or other administrative services;

11. A professional analysis of the feasibility of creation and maintenance of the program; and

12. Any other information required by rule of the state risk manager that is necessary to determine the probable financial and management success of the program or that is necessary to determine compliance with this chapter.

\[ [1991 sp.s. c 30 § 7](https://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/1991-92/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/House/1907-S.SL.pdf?cite=1991%20sp.s.%20c%2030%20§%207); \]

## 48.62.081 - Multistate program participants—Requirements.
A local government entity may participate in a joint self-insurance program covering property or liability risks with similar local government entities from other states if the program satisfies the following requirements:

1. Only those local government entities of this state and similar entities of other states that are provided insurance by the program may have ownership interest in the program;

2. The participating local government entities of this state and other states shall elect a board of directors to manage the program, a majority of whom shall be affiliated with one or more of the participating entities;

3. The program must provide coverage through the delivery to each participating entity of one or more written policies effecting insurance of covered risks;

4. The program shall be financed, including the payment of premiums and the contribution of initial capital, in accordance with the plan of management and operation submitted to the state risk manager in accordance with this chapter;

5. The financial statements of the program shall be audited annually by the certified public accountants for the program, and such audited financial statements shall be delivered to the Washington state auditor and the state risk manager not more than one hundred twenty days after the end of each fiscal year of the program;

6. The investments of the program shall be initiated only with financial institutions and/or broker-dealers doing business in those states in which participating entities are located, and such investments shall be audited annually by the certified public accountants for the program, and a list of such investments shall be delivered to the Washington state auditor not more than one hundred twenty days after the end of each fiscal year of the program;

7. The treasurer of a multistate joint self-insurance program shall be designated by resolution of the program and such treasurer shall be located in the state of one of the participating entities;

8. The participating entities may have no contingent liabilities for covered claims, other than liabilities for unpaid premiums, retrospective premiums, or assessments, if assets of the program are insufficient to cover the program's liabilities; and

9. The program shall obtain approval from the state risk manager in accordance with this chapter and shall remain in compliance with the provisions of this chapter, except to the extent that such provisions are modified by or inconsistent with this section.

\[ [1991 sp.s. c 30 § 8](https://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/1991-92/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/House/1907-S.SL.pdf?cite=1991%20sp.s.%20c%2030%20§%208); \]

## 48.62.091 - Program approval or disapproval—Procedures—Annual report.
1. Within one hundred twenty days of receipt of a plan of management and operation, the state risk manager shall either approve or disapprove the formation of the self-insurance program after reviewing the plan to determine whether the proposed program complies with this chapter and all rules adopted in accordance with this chapter.

2. If the state risk manager denies a request for approval, the state risk manager shall specify in detail the reasons for denial and the manner in which the program fails to meet the requirements of this chapter or any rules adopted in accordance with this chapter.

3. Whenever the state risk manager determines that a joint self-insurance program covering property or liability risks or an individual or joint self-insured health and welfare benefits program is in violation of this chapter or is operating in an unsafe financial condition, the state risk manager may issue and serve upon the program an order to cease and desist from the violation or practice.

   a. The state risk manager shall deliver the order to the appropriate entity or entities directly or mail it to the appropriate entity or entities by registered mail with return receipt requested.

   b. If the program violates the order or has not taken steps to comply with the order after the expiration of twenty days after the cease and desist order has been received by the program, the program is deemed to be operating in violation of this chapter, and the state risk manager shall notify the state auditor and the attorney general of the violation.

   c. After hearing or with the consent of a program governed by this chapter and in addition to or in lieu of a continuation of the cease and desist order, the risk manager may levy a fine upon the program in an amount not less than three hundred dollars and not more than ten thousand dollars. The order levying such fine shall specify the period within which the fine shall be fully paid. The period within which such fines shall be paid shall not be less than fifteen nor more than thirty days from the date of such order. Upon failure to pay any such fine when due the risk manager shall request the attorney general to bring a civil action on the risk manager's behalf to collect the fine. The risk manager shall pay any fine so collected to the state treasurer for the account of the general fund.

4. Each self-insurance program approved by the state risk manager shall annually file a report with the state risk manager and state auditor providing:

   a. Details of any changes in the articles of incorporation, bylaws, or interlocal agreement;

   b. Copies of all the insurance coverage documents;

   c. A description of the program structure, including participants' retention, program retention, and excess insurance limits and attachment point;

   d. An actuarial analysis, if required;

   e. A list of contractors and service providers;

   f. The financial and loss experience of the program; and

   g. Such other information as required by rule of the state risk manager.

5. No self-insurance program requiring the state risk manager's approval may engage in an act or practice that in any respect significantly differs from the management and operation plan that formed the basis for the state risk manager's approval of the program unless the program first notifies the state risk manager in writing and obtains the state risk manager's approval. The state risk manager shall approve or disapprove the proposed change within sixty days of receipt of the notice. If the state risk manager denies a requested change, the risk manager shall specify in detail the reasons for denial and the manner in which the program would fail to meet the requirements of this chapter or any rules adopted in accordance with this chapter.

\[ [1991 sp.s. c 30 § 9](https://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/1991-92/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/House/1907-S.SL.pdf?cite=1991%20sp.s.%20c%2030%20§%209); \]

## 48.62.101 - Access to information—Executive sessions—Public records act.
1. All self-insurance programs governed by this chapter may provide for executive sessions in accordance with chapter 42.30 RCW to consider litigation and settlement of claims when it appears that public discussion of these matters would impair the program's ability to conduct its business effectively.

2. Notwithstanding any provision to the contrary contained in the public records act, chapter 42.56 RCW, in a claim or action against the state or a local government entity, no person is entitled to discover that portion of any funds or liability reserve established for purposes of satisfying a claim or cause of action, except that the reserve is discoverable in a supplemental or ancillary proceeding to enforce a judgment. All other records of individual or joint self-insurance programs are subject to disclosure in accordance with chapter 42.56 RCW.

3. In accordance with chapter 42.56 RCW, bargaining groups representing local government employees shall have reasonable access to information concerning the experience and performance of any health and welfare benefits program established for the benefit of such employees.

\[ [2005 c 274 § 316](https://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/2005-06/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/House/1133-S.SL.pdf?cite=2005%20c%20274%20§%20316); [1991 sp.s. c 30 § 10](https://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/1991-92/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/House/1907-S.SL.pdf?cite=1991%20sp.s.%20c%2030%20§%2010); \]

## 48.62.111 - Investments—Designated treasurer—Deposit requirements—Bond.
1. The assets of a joint self-insurance program governed by this chapter may be invested only in accordance with the general investment authority that participating members possess as a governmental entity.

2. Except as provided in subsection (3) of this section, a joint self-insurance program may invest all or a portion of its assets by depositing the assets with the treasurer of a county within whose territorial limits any of its member local government entities lie, to be invested by the treasurer for the joint program.

3. Local government members of a joint self-insurance program, and the board of pilotage commissioners, may by resolution of the program designate some other person having experience in financial or fiscal matters as treasurer of the program, if that designated treasurer is located in Washington state. The program shall, unless the program's treasurer is a county treasurer, require a bond obtained from a surety company authorized to do business in Washington in an amount and under the terms and conditions that the program finds will protect against loss arising from mismanagement or malfeasance in investing and managing program funds. The program may pay the premium on the bond.

All program funds must be paid to the treasurer and shall be disbursed by the treasurer only on warrants issued by the treasurer or a person appointed by the program and upon orders or vouchers approved by the program or as authorized under chapters 35A.40 and 42.24 RCW. The treasurer shall establish a program account, into which shall be recorded all program funds, and the treasurer shall maintain special accounts as may be created by the program into which the treasurer shall record all money as the program may direct by resolution.

4. The treasurer of the joint program shall deposit all program funds in a public depository or depositories as defined in RCW 39.58.010(15) and under the same restrictions, contracts, and security as provided for any participating member, and the depository shall be designated by resolution of the program.

5. A joint self-insurance program may invest all or a portion of its assets by depositing the assets with the state investment board, to be invested by the state investment board in accordance with chapter 43.33A RCW. The state investment board shall designate a manager for those funds to whom the program may direct requests for disbursement upon orders or vouchers approved by the program or as authorized under chapters 35A.40 and 42.24 RCW.

6. All interest and earnings collected on joint program funds belong to the program and must be deposited to the program's credit in the proper program account.

7. A joint program may require a reasonable bond from any person handling money or securities of the program and may pay the premium for the bond.

8. Subsections (3) and (4) of this section do not apply to a multistate joint self-insurance program governed by RCW 48.62.081.

\[ [2019 c 26 § 4](https://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/2019-20/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/House/1431.SL.pdf?cite=2019%20c%2026%20§%204); [2003 c 248 § 20](https://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/2003-04/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/House/1083.SL.pdf?cite=2003%20c%20248%20§%2020); [1991 sp.s. c 30 § 11](https://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/1991-92/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/House/1907-S.SL.pdf?cite=1991%20sp.s.%20c%2030%20§%2011); \]

## 48.62.121 - General operating regulations—Employee remuneration—Governing control—School districts—Use of insurance producers and surplus line brokers—Health care services—Trusts.
1. No employee or official of a local government entity or the board of pilotage commissioners may directly or indirectly receive anything of value for services rendered in connection with the operation and management of a self-insurance program other than the salary and benefits provided by his or her employer or the reimbursement of expenses reasonably incurred in furtherance of the operation or management of the program. No employee or official of a local government entity or the board of pilotage commissioners may accept or solicit anything of value for personal benefit or for the benefit of others under circumstances in which it can be reasonably inferred that the employee's or official's independence of judgment is impaired with respect to the management and operation of the program.

2. [Empty]

   a. No local government entity may participate in a joint self-insurance program in which local government entities do not retain complete governing control. This prohibition does not apply to:

      i. Local government contribution to a self-insured employee health and welfare benefits plan otherwise authorized and governed by state statute;

      ii. Local government participation in a multistate joint program where control is shared with local government entities from other states;

      iii. Local government contribution to a self-insured employee health and welfare benefit trust in which the local government shares governing control with their employees; or

      iv. Local government participation in a joint self-insurance program with the board of pilotage commissioners, as authorized in RCW 48.62.037.

   b. If a local government self-insured health and welfare benefit program, established by the local government as a trust, shares governing control of the trust with its employees:

      i. The local government must maintain at least a fifty percent voting control of the trust;

      ii. No more than one voting, nonemployee, union representative selected by employees may serve as a trustee; and

      iii. The trust agreement must contain provisions for resolution of any deadlock in the administration of the trust.

3. Moneys made available and moneys expended by school districts and educational service districts for self-insurance under this chapter are subject to such rules of the superintendent of public instruction as the superintendent may adopt governing budgeting and accounting. However, the superintendent shall ensure that the rules are consistent with those adopted by the state risk manager for the management and operation of self-insurance programs.

4. RCW 48.30.140, 48.30.150, 48.30.155, and 48.30.157 apply to the use of insurance producers and surplus line brokers by local government self-insurance programs.

5. Every individual and joint local government self-insured health and welfare benefits program that provides comprehensive coverage for health care services shall include mandated benefits that the state health care authority is required to provide under RCW 41.05.170 and 41.05.180. The state risk manager may adopt rules identifying the mandated benefits.

6. An employee health and welfare benefit program established as a trust shall contain a provision that trust funds be expended only for purposes of the trust consistent with statutes and rules governing the local government or governments creating the trust.

\[ [2019 c 26 § 5](https://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/2019-20/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/House/1431.SL.pdf?cite=2019%20c%2026%20§%205); [2009 c 162 § 29](https://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/2009-10/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/House/1568.SL.pdf?cite=2009%20c%20162%20§%2029); [2008 c 217 § 62](https://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/2007-08/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/Senate/6591.SL.pdf?cite=2008%20c%20217%20§%2062); [1993 c 458 § 1](https://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/1993-94/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/House/1721-S.SL.pdf?cite=1993%20c%20458%20§%201); [1991 sp.s. c 30 § 12](https://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/1991-92/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/House/1907-S.SL.pdf?cite=1991%20sp.s.%20c%2030%20§%2012); \]

## 48.62.123 - Existing benefit program established as a trust—Risk manager—Limited extension of deadline for compliance.
No local government self-insured employee health and welfare benefit program established as a trust by a local government entity or entities prior to July 25, 1993, may continue in operation unless such program complies with the provisions of this chapter within one hundred eighty days after July 25, 1993. The state risk manager may extend such period if the risk manager finds that such local government entity or entities are making a good faith effort and taking all necessary steps to comply with this chapter; however, in no event may the risk manager extend the period required for compliance more than ninety days after the expiration of the initial one hundred eighty-day period.

\[ [1993 c 458 § 2](https://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/1993-94/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/House/1721-S.SL.pdf?cite=1993%20c%20458%20§%202); \]

## 48.62.125 - Educational service districts—Rules—Superintendent of public instruction.
All rules adopted by the superintendent of public instruction by January 1, 1992, that apply to self-insurance programs of educational service districts remain in effect until expressly amended, repealed, or superseded by the state risk manager or the state health care authority.

\[ [1991 sp.s. c 30 § 31](https://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/1991-92/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/House/1907-S.SL.pdf?cite=1991%20sp.s.%20c%2030%20§%2031); \]

## 48.62.131 - Preexisting programs—Notice to state auditor.
Every local government entity that has established a self-insurance program not subject to the prior approval requirements of this chapter shall provide written notice to the state auditor of the existence of the program. The notice must identify the manager of the program and the class or classes of risk self-insured. The notice must also identify all investments and distribution of assets of the program, the current depository of assets and the program's designation of asset depository and investment agent as required by RCW 48.62.111. In addition, the local government entity shall notify the state auditor whenever the program covers a new class of risk or discontinues the self-insurance of a class of risk.

\[ [1991 sp.s. c 30 § 13](https://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/1991-92/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/House/1907-S.SL.pdf?cite=1991%20sp.s.%20c%2030%20§%2013); \]

## 48.62.141 - Insufficient assets—Program requirement.
Every joint self-insurance program covering liability or property risks, excluding multistate programs governed by RCW 48.62.081 and nonprofit risk pools formed under *RCW 48.62.036 and chapter 48.180 RCW, shall provide for the contingent liability of participants in the program if assets of the program are insufficient to cover the program's liabilities.

\[ [2015 c 109 § 4](https://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/2015-16/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/Senate/5119.SL.pdf?cite=2015%20c%20109%20§%204); [1991 sp.s. c 30 § 14](https://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/1991-92/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/House/1907-S.SL.pdf?cite=1991%20sp.s.%20c%2030%20§%2014); \]

## 48.62.151 - Insurance premium taxes—Exemption.
A joint self-insurance program approved in accordance with this chapter is exempt from insurance premium taxes, from fees assessed under chapter 48.02 RCW, from chapters 48.32 and 48.32A RCW, from business and occupations taxes imposed under chapter 82.04 RCW, and from any assigned risk plan or joint underwriting association otherwise required by law. This section does not apply to and no exemption is provided for insurance companies issuing policies to cover program risks, nor does it apply to or provide an exemption for third-party administrators, surplus line brokers, or insurance producers serving the self-insurance program.

\[ [2009 c 162 § 30](https://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/2009-10/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/House/1568.SL.pdf?cite=2009%20c%20162%20§%2030); [2008 c 217 § 63](https://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/2007-08/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/Senate/6591.SL.pdf?cite=2008%20c%20217%20§%2063); [1991 sp.s. c 30 § 15](https://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/1991-92/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/House/1907-S.SL.pdf?cite=1991%20sp.s.%20c%2030%20§%2015); \]

## 48.62.161 - Establishment of fee to cover costs—State risk manager.
1. The state risk manager shall establish and charge an investigation fee in an amount necessary to cover the costs for the initial review and approval of a self-insurance program. The fee must accompany the initial submission of the plan of operation and management.

2. The costs of subsequent reviews and investigations shall be charged to the self-insurance program being reviewed or investigated in accordance with the actual time and expenses incurred in the review or investigation.

3. The state risk manager may calculate, levy, and collect from each joint property and liability self-insurance program and each individual and joint health and welfare benefit program regulated by this chapter a start-up assessment to pay initial expenses and operating costs of the risk manager's office in administering this chapter. Any program failing to remit its assessment when due is subject to denial of permission to operate or to a cease and desist order until the assessment is paid.

\[ [2010 1st sp.s. c 7 § 56](https://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/2009-10/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/House/2617-S2.SL.pdf?cite=2010%201st%20sp.s.%20c%207%20§%2056); [1991 sp.s. c 30 § 16](https://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/1991-92/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/House/1907-S.SL.pdf?cite=1991%20sp.s.%20c%2030%20§%2016); \]

## 48.62.171 - Dissemination of information—Civil immunity.
1. Any person who files reports or furnishes other information required under Title 48 RCW, required by the risk manager or the state auditor under authority granted by Title 48 RCW, or which is useful to the risk manager or the state auditor in the administration of Title 48 RCW, shall be immune from liability in any civil action or suit arising from the filing of any such report or furnishing such information to the risk manager or to the state auditor, unless actual malice, fraud, or bad faith is shown.

2. The risk manager and the state auditor, and the agents and employees of each, are immune from liability in any civil action or suit arising from the publication of any report or bulletins or arising from dissemination of information related to the official activities of the risk manager, the advisory boards, or the state auditor, unless actual malice, fraud, or bad faith is shown.

3. The immunity granted by this section is in addition to any common law or statutory privilege or immunity enjoyed by such person, and nothing in this section is intended to abrogate or modify in any way such common law or statutory privilege or immunity.

\[ [1991 sp.s. c 30 § 17](https://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/1991-92/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/House/1907-S.SL.pdf?cite=1991%20sp.s.%20c%2030%20§%2017); \]

## 48.62.900 - Effective date, implementation, application—1991 sp.s. c 30.
1. This act shall take effect January 1, 1992, but the state risk manager shall take all steps necessary to implement this act on its effective date.

2. Every individual local government self-insured employee health and welfare plan and self-insurance program that has been in continuous operation for at least one year before January 1, 1992, need not obtain approval to continue operations until January 1, 1993, but must comply with all other provisions of this act.

3. Local government entity authority to self-insure employee health and welfare benefits applies retroactively to 1979.

\[ [1991 sp.s. c 30 § 30](https://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/1991-92/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/House/1907-S.SL.pdf?cite=1991%20sp.s.%20c%2030%20§%2030); \]

