# 48.68 - Health care savings account act.
* [48.68.005 - Intent—Health care savings accounts authorized.](#4868005---intenthealth-care-savings-accounts-authorized)
* [48.68.010 - Duties of governor and responsible agencies—Chapter to remain in effect.](#4868010---duties-of-governor-and-responsible-agencieschapter-to-remain-in-effect)
## 48.68.005 - Intent—Health care savings accounts authorized.
1. This chapter shall be known as the health care savings account act.

2. The legislature recognizes that the costs of health care are increasing rapidly and most individuals are removed from participating in the purchase of their health care.

As a result, it becomes critical to encourage and support solutions to alleviate the demand for diminishing state resources. In response to these increasing costs in health care spending, the legislature intends to clarify that health care savings accounts may be offered as health benefit options to all residents as incentives to reduce unnecessary health services utilization, administration, and paperwork, and to encourage individuals to be in charge of and participate directly in their use of service and health care spending. To alleviate the possible impoverishment of residents requiring long-term care, health care savings accounts may promote savings for long-term care and provide incentives for individuals to protect themselves from financial hardship due to a long-term health care need.

3. Health care savings accounts are authorized in Washington state as options to employers and residents.

\[ [1995 c 265 § 2](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/1995-96/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/House/1046-S.SL.pdf?cite=1995%20c%20265%20§%202); \]

## 48.68.010 - Duties of governor and responsible agencies—Chapter to remain in effect.
The governor and responsible agencies shall:

1. Request that the United States congress amend the internal revenue code to treat premiums and contributions to health benefits plans, such as health care savings account programs, basic health plans, conventional and standard health plans offered through a health carrier, by employers, self-employed persons, and individuals, as fully excluded employer expenses and deductible from individual adjusted gross income for federal tax purposes.

2. Request that the United States congress amend the internal revenue code to exempt from federal income tax interest that accrues in health care savings accounts until such money is withdrawn for expenditures other than eligible health expenses as defined in law.

3. If all federal statute or regulatory waivers necessary to fully implement this chapter have not been obtained by July 1, 1995, this chapter shall remain in effect.

\[ [1995 c 265 § 3](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/1995-96/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/House/1046-S.SL.pdf?cite=1995%20c%20265%20§%203); \]

