# 28A.625 - Awards.
* [28A.625.005 - Condensed compliance reports—Second-class districts.](#28a625005---condensed-compliance-reportssecond-class-districts)
* [28A.625.100 - Board of directors of a school district may establish.](#28a625100---board-of-directors-of-a-school-district-may-establish)
* [28A.625.110 - Awards.](#28a625110---awards)
* [28A.625.150 - Award program.](#28a625150---award-program)
## 28A.625.005 - Condensed compliance reports—Second-class districts.
Any compliance reporting requirements as a result of laws in this chapter that apply to second-class districts may be submitted in accordance with RCW 28A.330.250.

\[ [2011 c 45 § 48](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/2011-12/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/Senate/5184-S.SL.pdf?cite=2011%20c%2045%20§%2048); \]

## 28A.625.100 - Board of directors of a school district may establish.
The board of directors of any school district may establish and maintain an employee suggestion program to encourage and reward meritorious suggestions by certificated and classified school employees. The program shall be designed to promote efficiency or economy in the performance of any function of the school district. Each board establishing an employee suggestion program shall establish procedures for the proper administration of the program.

\[ [1986 c 143 § 1](http://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1986c143.pdf?cite=1986%20c%20143%20§%201); \]

## 28A.625.110 - Awards.
The board of directors of the school district shall make the final determination as to whether an employee suggestion award will be made and shall determine the nature and extent of the award. The award shall not be a regular or supplemental compensation program for all employees and the suggestion must, in fact, result in actual savings greater than the award amount. Any moneys which may be awarded to an employee as part of an employee suggestion program shall not be considered salary or compensation for the purposes of RCW 28A.400.200 or chapter 41.40 RCW.

\[ [1990 c 33 § 519](http://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1990c33.pdf?cite=1990%20c%2033%20§%20519); [1987 1st ex.s. c 2 § 207](http://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1987ex1c2.pdf?cite=1987%201st%20ex.s.%20c%202%20§%20207); [1986 c 143 § 2](http://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1986c143.pdf?cite=1986%20c%20143%20§%202); \]

## 28A.625.150 - Award program.
The board of directors of any school district may establish a commendable employee service and recognition award program for certificated and classified school employees. The program shall be designed to recognize exemplary service, special achievements, or outstanding contributions by an individual in the performance of his or her duties as an employee of the school district. The board of directors of the school district shall determine the extent and type of any nonmonetary award. The value of any nonmonetary award shall not be deemed salary or compensation for the purposes of RCW 28A.400.200 or chapter 41.32 RCW.

\[ [1990 c 33 § 520](http://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1990c33.pdf?cite=1990%20c%2033%20§%20520); [1987 1st ex.s. c 2 § 210](http://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1987ex1c2.pdf?cite=1987%201st%20ex.s.%20c%202%20§%20210); [1985 c 399 § 2](http://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1985c399.pdf?cite=1985%20c%20399%20§%202); \]


## **28A.625.XXX - TBD**
**
1. [Empty]

    a. The purple star award is created to recognize military friendly schools that show a commitment to students and families connected to the nation's military. Schools that earn the award will receive a special purple star recognition to display on site. The office of the superintendent of public instruction may collaborate with a state agency or nonprofit organization that has experience serving military-connected students and families to administer the award. A school must be considered for the purple star award if it applies and completes all the required activities and at least one optional activity listed in this section.

    b. A school must complete the following required activities to be considered to receive the purple star award:

        i. The school must have a staff point of contact for military students and families. The school staff point of contact must:

(A) Work jointly with the state military family education liaison under RCW 28A.705.010, article VIII to serve military families;

(B) Serve as the primary liaison between military families and the school;

(C) Complete professional development on special considerations for military students and families under relevant state and federal law; and

(D) Identify and inform teachers of military-connected students in their classrooms and the special considerations military families and students should receive under the interstate compact on educational opportunity for military children under RCW 28A.705.010; and

        ii. The school maintains a dedicated page on its website featuring resources for military families.

    c. A school must complete at least one of the following optional activities to be considered to receive the purple star award:

        i. The school provides professional development for additional staff on special considerations for military students and families;

        ii. The local school district board of directors passes a resolution publicizing the school's support for military children and families; or

        iii. The school hosts a military recognition event that demonstrates a military friendly culture.

2. The office of the superintendent of public instruction must make available on its website:

    a. A simple application for a school or school district to submit for consideration to receive a purple star award. The application must require evidence of meeting each of the required activities under subsection (1)(b) of this section and at least one optional activity under subsection (1)(c) of this section necessary to receive the purple star award;

    b. A timeline for submittal of an application for consideration and for announcement of the award recipients; and

    c. The criteria being used to review the applications received and determine which school or schools receive the award.

3. The purple star award shall be awarded every two years, beginning in 2023.


[ 2021 c XXX § 1; ]**
