# 18.54 - Optometry board.
* [18.54.010 - Definitions.](#1854010---definitions)
* [18.54.020 - Examining committee reconstituted as optometry board.](#1854020---examining-committee-reconstituted-as-optometry-board)
* [18.54.030 - Composition—Appointments—Qualifications—Terms—Vacancies.](#1854030---compositionappointmentsqualificationstermsvacancies)
* [18.54.040 - Officers.](#1854040---officers)
* [18.54.050 - Meetings.](#1854050---meetings)
* [18.54.060 - Quorum.](#1854060---quorum)
* [18.54.070 - Powers and duties—Examinations—Rules.](#1854070---powers-and-dutiesexaminationsrules)
* [18.54.076 - Application of uniform disciplinary act.](#1854076---application-of-uniform-disciplinary-act)
* [18.54.090 - Administrative procedures—Minimum fees.](#1854090---administrative-proceduresminimum-fees)
* [18.54.130 - Compensation and travel expenses of members.](#1854130---compensation-and-travel-expenses-of-members)
* [18.54.140 - Board may draw from health professions account.](#1854140---board-may-draw-from-health-professions-account)
* [18.54.150 - Devolution of powers relating to revocation of certificates.](#1854150---devolution-of-powers-relating-to-revocation-of-certificates)
* [18.54.900 - Short title.](#1854900---short-title)
* [18.54.920 - RCW  43.24.060 and  43.24.120 not applicable to optometry.](#1854920---rcw--4324060-and--4324120-not-applicable-to-optometry)
## 18.54.010 - Definitions.
Unless the context clearly indicates otherwise, the terms used in this chapter take their meanings as follows:

1. "Board" means the optometry board;

2. "License" means a certificate or permit to practice optometry as provided in *RCW 18.53.020 as amended from time to time;

3. "Members" means members of the optometry board.

\[ [1963 c 25 § 1](http://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1963c25.pdf?cite=1963%20c%2025%20§%201); \]

## 18.54.020 - Examining committee reconstituted as optometry board.
The examining committee, heretofore created pursuant to RCW 43.24.060, is reorganized and reconstituted as the optometry board.

\[ [1963 c 25 § 2](http://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1963c25.pdf?cite=1963%20c%2025%20§%202); \]

## **18.54.030 - Composition—Appointments—Qualifications—Terms—Vacancies.**
**The board of optometry shall consist of six members appointed by the governor. Five members shall be Washington licensed practicing optometrists whose licenses are in good standing. One member shall be a consumer member who is not associated with or financially interested in the practice or business regulated.**

**Each optometrist member shall be a Washington licensed practicing optometrist in good standing for not less than five years immediately preceding his or her appointment to the board. The member shall not be in any way connected with or interested in any optometric supply business.**

**The members shall serve for a term of three years with the option of reappointment for subsequent three year terms at the governor's discretion.**

In the event that a vacancy occurs on the board in the middle of an appointee's term, the governor must appoint a successor for the unexpired portion of the term only.

## 18.54.040 - Officers.
The board must elect a chair and secretary from its members, to serve for a term of one year or until their successors are elected and qualified.

\[ [2011 c 336 § 490](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/2011-12/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/Senate/5045.SL.pdf?cite=2011%20c%20336%20§%20490); [1963 c 25 § 4](http://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1963c25.pdf?cite=1963%20c%2025%20§%204); \]

## **18.54.050 - Meetings.**
The board must meet at least once yearly or more frequently upon call of the **board's officers** or the secretary of health at such times and places as the **board's officers** or the secretary of health may designate by giving three days' notice or as otherwise required by RCW 42.30.075. **A full record of the board's proceedings shall be kept in the office of the board and shall be open to inspection at all reasonable times.**

## **18.54.060 - Quorum.**
**A majority of** members constitute a quorum for the transaction of business of the board.

## **18.54.070 - Powers and duties—Examinations—Rules.**
The board has the following powers and duties:

1. To develop and administer, or approve, or both, a licensure examination. The board may approve an examination prepared or administered by a private testing agency or association of licensing authorities.

2. The board shall adopt rules and regulations to promote safety, protection and the welfare of the public, to carry out the purposes of this chapter, to aid the board in the performance of its powers and duties, and to govern the practice of optometry. **The administrative regulations shall include the classification and licensure of optometrists by examination or credentials, retirement of a license, and reinstatement of a license.**

3. **The board shall have the sole authority to determine what constitutes the practice of optometry within the confines of this chapter and chapter 18.53 RCW.**

4. **The board shall keep a register containing the name, address, license number, email, and phone number of every person licensed to practice optometry in this state to the best of their ability.**

## 18.54.076 - Application of uniform disciplinary act.
The uniform disciplinary act, chapter 18.130 RCW, governs unlicensed practice, the issuance and denial of licenses, and the discipline of licensees under this chapter and chapter 18.53 RCW.

\[ [1987 c 150 § 37](http://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1987c150.pdf?cite=1987%20c%20150%20§%2037); [1986 c 259 § 79](http://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1986c259.pdf?cite=1986%20c%20259%20§%2079); \]

## 18.54.090 - Administrative procedures—Minimum fees.
The board is an administrative agency of the state of Washington, and the provisions of the administrative procedure act, chapter 34.05 RCW as amended from time to time, govern the conduct and proceedings of the board. Nothing in this chapter shall be construed to give the board the power to set or recommend a minimum schedule of fees to be charged by licensed optometrist.

\[ [1963 c 25 § 9](http://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1963c25.pdf?cite=1963%20c%2025%20§%209); \]

## 18.54.130 - Compensation and travel expenses of members.
Members of the board are entitled to receive their travel expenses in accordance with RCW 43.03.050 and 43.03.060. Each member of the board will also be compensated in accordance with RCW 43.03.240.

\[ [1984 c 287 § 41](http://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1984c287.pdf?cite=1984%20c%20287%20§%2041); 1975-'76 2nd ex.s. c 34 § 39; [1967 c 188 § 3](http://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1967c188.pdf?cite=1967%20c%20188%20§%203); [1963 c 25 § 13](http://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1963c25.pdf?cite=1963%20c%2025%20§%2013); \]

## 18.54.140 - Board may draw from health professions account.
Notwithstanding any other provisions of law, rule or regulation, the board may draw from the health professions account on vouchers approved by the secretary of health, so much money as is necessary to carry into effect, to administer, and to enforce the provisions of this chapter.

\[ [1991 c 3 § 141](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/1991-92/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/House/1115.SL.pdf?cite=1991%20c%203%20§%20141); [1983 c 168 § 9](http://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1983c168.pdf?cite=1983%20c%20168%20§%209); [1979 c 158 § 50](http://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1979c158.pdf?cite=1979%20c%20158%20§%2050); [1975 1st ex.s. c 69 § 12](http://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1975ex1c69.pdf?cite=1975%201st%20ex.s.%20c%2069%20§%2012); [1963 c 25 § 14](http://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1963c25.pdf?cite=1963%20c%2025%20§%2014); \]

## 18.54.150 - Devolution of powers relating to revocation of certificates.
All powers previously vested in the director of licenses under the provisions of RCW 18.53.100 are vested in the optometry board.

\[ [1963 c 25 § 15](http://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1963c25.pdf?cite=1963%20c%2025%20§%2015); \]

## 18.54.900 - Short title.
This act may be known and cited as the "optometry board act."

\[ [1963 c 25 § 16](http://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1963c25.pdf?cite=1963%20c%2025%20§%2016); \]

## 18.54.920 - RCW  43.24.060 and  43.24.120 not applicable to optometry.
The provisions of RCW 43.24.060 and 43.24.120 are not applicable to the licensing and regulation of the practice of optometry.

\[ [1999 c 240 § 6](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/1999-00/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/House/2200.SL.pdf?cite=1999%20c%20240%20§%206); [1963 c 25 § 18](http://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1963c25.pdf?cite=1963%20c%2025%20§%2018); \]

