# 43.83F - Capitol facilities revenue bonds, 1969—East capitol site bonds, 1969.
* [43.83F.010 - Refunding bonds—Issuance—Authorization.](#4383f010---refunding-bondsissuanceauthorization)
* [43.83F.020 - Refunding bonds—Powers and duties of state finance committee.](#4383f020---refunding-bondspowers-and-duties-of-state-finance-committee)
* [43.83F.030 - Refunding bonds—Administration of proceeds from sale—Exception.](#4383f030---refunding-bondsadministration-of-proceeds-from-saleexception)
* [43.83F.040 - Refunding bonds—Payment from bond redemption fund—Procedure—General obligation of state.](#4383f040---refunding-bondspayment-from-bond-redemption-fundproceduregeneral-obligation-of-state)
* [43.83F.050 - Refunding bonds—Legislature may provide additional means for payment.](#4383f050---refunding-bondslegislature-may-provide-additional-means-for-payment)
* [43.83F.060 - Refunding bonds—Legal investment for state and other public bodies.](#4383f060---refunding-bondslegal-investment-for-state-and-other-public-bodies)
## 43.83F.010 - Refunding bonds—Issuance—Authorization.
The state finance committee is authorized to issue general obligation bonds of the state in the amount of twenty-one million dollars, or so much thereof as may be required to refund, at or prior to maturity, the outstanding "State of Washington Capitol Facilities Revenue Bonds, 1969", dated October 1, 1969, and the outstanding "State of Washington East Capitol Site Bonds, 1969", dated October 1, 1969, and to pay any premium payable with respect thereto and all interest thereon, and to pay all costs incidental thereto and to the issuance of the bonds authorized by this chapter. The bonds authorized by this chapter shall be paid and discharged within thirty years of the date of issuance in accordance with Article VIII, section 1, of the state Constitution.

\[ [1974 ex.s. c 113 § 1](http://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1974ex1c113.pdf?cite=1974%20ex.s.%20c%20113%20§%201); \]

## 43.83F.020 - Refunding bonds—Powers and duties of state finance committee.
The issuance, sale and retirement of said bonds shall be under the supervision and control of the state finance committee. The committee is authorized to prescribe the form, terms, conditions, and covenants of the bonds, the time or times of sale of all or any portion of them, and the conditions and manner of their sale, issuance and redemption. None of the bonds herein authorized shall be sold for less than the par value thereof.

The committee may provide that the bonds, or any of them, may be called prior to the maturity date thereof under such terms, conditions, and provisions as it may determine and may authorize the use of facsimile signatures in the issuance of such bonds. Such bonds shall be payable at such places as the committee may provide.

\[ [1974 ex.s. c 113 § 2](http://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1974ex1c113.pdf?cite=1974%20ex.s.%20c%20113%20§%202); \]

## 43.83F.030 - Refunding bonds—Administration of proceeds from sale—Exception.
The proceeds from the sale of bonds authorized by this chapter shall be set aside for the payment of the bonds to be refunded in accordance with chapter 39.53 RCW, except that investment and reinvestment thereof shall be limited to direct obligations of the United States of America.

\[ [1974 ex.s. c 113 § 3](http://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1974ex1c113.pdf?cite=1974%20ex.s.%20c%20113%20§%203); \]

## 43.83F.040 - Refunding bonds—Payment from bond redemption fund—Procedure—General obligation of state.
The state building refunding bond redemption fund is hereby created in the state treasury, which fund shall be exclusively devoted to the payment of the principal of and interest on the bonds authorized by this chapter. The state finance committee, shall, on or before June 30th of each year, certify to the state treasurer the amount needed in the ensuing twelve months to meet such bond retirement and interest requirements and on July 1st of each year the state treasurer shall deposit such amount in the state building bond redemption fund from any general state revenues received in the state treasury and certified by the state treasurer to be general state revenues. Bonds issued under the provisions of this chapter shall state that they are a general obligation of the state of Washington, shall pledge the full faith and credit of the state to the payment of the principal thereof and the interest thereon and shall contain an unconditional promise to pay such principal and interest as the same shall become due. The owner and holder of each of the bonds or the trustee for the owner and holder of any of the bonds may by a mandamus or other appropriate proceeding require the transfer and payment of funds as directed herein.

\[ [1974 ex.s. c 113 § 4](http://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1974ex1c113.pdf?cite=1974%20ex.s.%20c%20113%20§%204); \]

## 43.83F.050 - Refunding bonds—Legislature may provide additional means for payment.
The legislature may provide additional means for raising moneys for the payment of the principal of and interest on the bonds authorized in this chapter, and this chapter shall not be deemed to provide an exclusive method for such payment.

\[ [1974 ex.s. c 113 § 5](http://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1974ex1c113.pdf?cite=1974%20ex.s.%20c%20113%20§%205); \]

## 43.83F.060 - Refunding bonds—Legal investment for state and other public bodies.
The bonds authorized in this chapter shall be a legal investment for all state funds or funds under state control and for all funds of any other public body.

\[ [1974 ex.s. c 113 § 6](http://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1974ex1c113.pdf?cite=1974%20ex.s.%20c%20113%20§%206); \]

