# 43.34 - Capitol committee.
* [43.34.010 - Composition of committee.](#4334010---composition-of-committee)
* [43.34.015 - Secretary of committee—Committee records.](#4334015---secretary-of-committeecommittee-records)
* [43.34.040 - Buildings—Erection—Improvements.](#4334040---buildingserectionimprovements)
* [43.34.080 - Capitol campus design advisory committee—Generally.](#4334080---capitol-campus-design-advisory-committeegenerally)
* [43.34.090 - Building names.](#4334090---building-names)
## 43.34.010 - Composition of committee.
The governor or the governor's designee, the lieutenant governor, the secretary of state, and the commissioner of public lands, ex officio, shall constitute the state capitol committee.

\[ [1997 c 279 § 1](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/1997-98/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/Senate/5354.SL.pdf?cite=1997%20c%20279%20§%201); [1979 ex.s. c 57 § 10](https://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1979ex1c57.pdf?cite=1979%20ex.s.%20c%2057%20§%2010); [1965 c 8 § 43.34.010](https://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1965c8.pdf?cite=1965%20c%208%20§%2043.34.010); [1961 c 300 § 5](https://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1961c300.pdf?cite=1961%20c%20300%20§%205); [1921 c 7 § 8](https://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1921c7.pdf?cite=1921%20c%207%20§%208); RRS § 10766; \]

## 43.34.015 - Secretary of committee—Committee records.
The commissioner of public lands shall be the secretary of the state capitol committee, but the committee may appoint a suitable person as acting secretary thereof, and fix his or her compensation. However, all records of the committee shall be filed in the office of the commissioner of public lands.

\[ [1997 c 279 § 2](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/1997-98/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/Senate/5354.SL.pdf?cite=1997%20c%20279%20§%202); [1965 c 8 § 43.34.015](https://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1965c8.pdf?cite=1965%20c%208%20§%2043.34.015); [1959 c 257 § 45](https://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1959c257.pdf?cite=1959%20c%20257%20§%2045); [1909 c 69 § 1](https://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1909c69.pdf?cite=1909%20c%2069%20§%201); RRS § 7897; \]

## 43.34.040 - Buildings—Erection—Improvements.
The state capitol committee may erect one or more permanent buildings; one or more temporary buildings; excavate or partially excavate for any such building or buildings; partially erect any such building or buildings; make other temporary or permanent improvements wholly or in part; upon the capitol grounds belonging to the state and known as the "Sylvester site" or "Capitol place" in Olympia, Washington.

\[ [1965 c 8 § 43.34.040](https://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1965c8.pdf?cite=1965%20c%208%20§%2043.34.040); [1933 ex.s. c 34 § 1](https://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1933ex1c34.pdf?cite=1933%20ex.s.%20c%2034%20§%201); RRS § 7915-1; \]

## 43.34.080 - Capitol campus design advisory committee—Generally.
1. The capitol campus design advisory committee is established as an advisory group to the capitol committee and the director of enterprise services to review programs, planning, design, and landscaping of state capitol facilities and grounds and to make recommendations that will contribute to the attainment of architectural, aesthetic, functional, and environmental excellence in design and maintenance of capitol facilities on campus and located in neighboring communities.

2. The advisory committee shall consist of the following persons who shall be appointed by and serve at the pleasure of the director of enterprise services:

   a. Two architects;

   b. A landscape architect; and

   c. An urban planner.

The director of enterprise services shall appoint the chair and vice chair and shall provide the staff and resources necessary for implementing this section. The advisory committee shall meet at least once every ninety days and at the call of the chair.

The members of the committee shall be reimbursed as provided in RCW 43.03.220 and 44.04.120.

3. The advisory committee shall also consist of the secretary of state and two members of the house of representatives, one from each caucus, who shall be appointed by the speaker of the house of representatives, and two members of the senate, one from each caucus, who shall be appointed by the president of the senate.

4. The advisory committee shall review plans and designs affecting state capitol facilities as they are developed. The advisory committee's review shall include:

   a. The process of solicitation and selection of appropriate professional design services including design-build proposals;

   b. Compliance with the capitol campus master plan and design concepts as adopted by the capitol committee;

   c. The design, siting, and grouping of state capitol facilities relative to the service needs of state government and the impact upon the local community's economy, environment, traffic patterns, and other factors;

   d. The relationship of overall state capitol facility planning to the respective comprehensive plans for long-range urban development of the cities of Olympia, Lacey, and Tumwater, and Thurston county; and

   e. Landscaping plans and designs, including planting proposals, street furniture, sculpture, monuments, and access to the capitol campus and buildings.

5. For development of the property known as the 1063 block, the committee may review the proposal selected by the department of enterprise services but must not propose changes that will affect the scope, budget, or schedule of the project.

\[ [2013 2nd sp.s. c 19 § 7015](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/2013-14/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/Senate/5035-S.SL.pdf?cite=2013%202nd%20sp.s.%20c%2019%20§%207015); [2011 1st sp.s. c 21 § 34](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/2011-12/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/House/1371-S2.SL.pdf?cite=2011%201st%20sp.s.%20c%2021%20§%2034); [1990 c 93 § 1](https://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1990c93.pdf?cite=1990%20c%2093%20§%201); \]

## 43.34.090 - Building names.
1. The legislature shall approve names for new or existing buildings on the state capitol grounds based upon recommendations from the state capitol committee and the director of the department of enterprise services, with the advice of the capitol campus design advisory committee, subject to the following limitations:

   a. An existing building may be renamed only after a substantial renovation or a change in the predominant tenant agency headquartered in the building.

   b. A new or existing building may be named or renamed after:

      i. An individual who has played a significant role in Washington history;

      ii. The purpose of the building;

      iii. The single or predominant tenant agency headquartered in the building;

      iv. A significant place name or natural place in Washington;

      v. A Native American tribe located in Washington;

      vi. A group of people or type of person;

      vii. Any other appropriate person consistent with this section as recommended by the director of the department of enterprise services.

   c. The names on the facades of the state capitol group shall not be removed.

2. The legislature shall approve names for new or existing public rooms or spaces on the west capitol campus based upon recommendations from the state capitol committee and the director of the department of enterprise services, with the advice of the capitol campus design advisory committee, subject to the following limitations:

   a. An existing room or space may be renamed only after a substantial renovation;

   b. A new or existing room or space may be named or renamed only after:

      i. An individual who has played a significant role in Washington history;

      ii. The purpose of the room or space;

      iii. A significant place name or natural place in Washington;

      iv. A Native American tribe located in Washington;

      v. A group of people or type of person;

      vi. Any other appropriate person consistent with this section as recommended by the director of the department of enterprise services.

3. When naming or renaming buildings, rooms, and spaces under this section, consideration must be given to: (a) Any disparity that exists with respect to the gender of persons after whom buildings, rooms, and spaces are named on the state capitol grounds; (b) the diversity of human achievement; and (c) the diversity of the state's citizenry and history.

4. For purposes of this section, "state capitol grounds" means buildings and land owned by the state and otherwise designated as state capitol grounds, including the west capitol campus, the east capitol campus, the north capitol campus, the Tumwater campus, the Lacey campus, Sylvester Park, Centennial Park, the Old Capitol Building, and Capitol Lake.

\[ [2015 c 225 § 74](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/2015-16/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/Senate/5024.SL.pdf?cite=2015%20c%20225%20§%2074); [2002 c 164 § 1](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/2001-02/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/House/1079-S.SL.pdf?cite=2002%20c%20164%20§%201); \]

