# 43.21E - Grass burning research advisory committee.
* [43.21E.010 - Committee created—Members.](#4321e010---committee-createdmembers)
* [43.21E.020 - Duties of committee.](#4321e020---duties-of-committee)
* [43.21E.030 - Travel expenses.](#4321e030---travel-expenses)
* [43.21E.900 - Termination and dissolution of committee.](#4321e900---termination-and-dissolution-of-committee)
* [43.21E.905 - Reactivation of committee—Application of chapter.](#4321e905---reactivation-of-committeeapplication-of-chapter)
## 43.21E.010 - Committee created—Members.
Within thirty days of May 15, 1975 the director of the Washington state department of ecology shall appoint a grass burning research advisory committee consisting of five voting members.

Two members shall be grass growers selected from the area of the state east of the Cascade mountain range, one representing irrigated and one representing dryland growing areas. One member shall be a grass grower selected from the area of the state west of the Cascade mountain range. One member shall be a representative of the Washington state department of agriculture, and one member shall represent the public, and may be selected at large. The committee shall select its own chair. The state department of ecology shall provide an ex officio, nonvoting member to the committee to act as secretary.

\[ [2009 c 549 § 5097](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/2009-10/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/Senate/5038.SL.pdf?cite=2009%20c%20549%20§%205097); [1975 1st ex.s. c 44 § 1](http://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1975ex1c44.pdf?cite=1975%201st%20ex.s.%20c%2044%20§%201); \]

## 43.21E.020 - Duties of committee.
The grass burning research advisory committee as provided for in RCW 43.21E.010 shall solicit and review research proposals for reducing or to develop alternates to open burning of grass fields. The committee shall advise and make recommendations to the director of the Washington state department of ecology regarding research priorities and the expenditure of mandatory research permit fees and such other grass burning research funds that may be provided by the legislature or from any other sources.

\[ [1975 1st ex.s. c 44 § 2](http://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1975ex1c44.pdf?cite=1975%201st%20ex.s.%20c%2044%20§%202); \]

## 43.21E.030 - Travel expenses.
Travel expenses shall be paid to the grass burning research advisory committee members not otherwise employed by the state for meetings called by the director of the department of ecology in accordance with RCW 43.03.050 and 43.03.060 as now existing or hereafter amended upon vouchers approved by said director and paid from funds budgeted for operation purposes of the state department of ecology.

\[ 1975-'76 2nd ex.s. c 34 § 102; [1975 1st ex.s. c 44 § 3](http://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1975ex1c44.pdf?cite=1975%201st%20ex.s.%20c%2044%20§%203); \]

## 43.21E.900 - Termination and dissolution of committee.
It is the intent and purpose of this chapter that as soon as an alternative means of grass burning is developed for the state, or by January 1, 1980, whichever is sooner the grass burning research advisory committee shall be dissolved and its actions terminated, and the director of the state department of ecology shall see that such purpose is so carried out.

\[ [1975 1st ex.s. c 44 § 4](http://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1975ex1c44.pdf?cite=1975%201st%20ex.s.%20c%2044%20§%204); \]

## 43.21E.905 - Reactivation of committee—Application of chapter.
Notwithstanding RCW 43.21E.900, within thirty days or after June 30, 1982, the director shall reactivate the grass burning research advisory committee by appointing new members to the committee. The provisions of this chapter, other than RCW 43.21E.900, shall apply to the reactivated committee.

\[ [1982 c 163 § 15](http://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1982c163.pdf?cite=1982%20c%20163%20§%2015); \]

