# 43.99K - Financing for appropriations—1995-1997 biennium.
* [43.99K.010 - 1995-1997 Fiscal biennium—General obligation bonds for capital and operating appropriations acts.](#4399k010---1995-1997-fiscal-bienniumgeneral-obligation-bonds-for-capital-and-operating-appropriations-acts)
* [43.99K.020 - Conditions and limitations.](#4399k020---conditions-and-limitations)
* [43.99K.030 - Retirement of bonds—Reimbursement of general fund—Pledge and promise—Remedies.](#4399k030---retirement-of-bondsreimbursement-of-general-fundpledge-and-promiseremedies)
* [43.99K.040 - Additional means for payment of principal and interest.](#4399k040---additional-means-for-payment-of-principal-and-interest)
* [43.99K.050 - Legal investment.](#4399k050---legal-investment)
## 43.99K.010 - 1995-1997 Fiscal biennium—General obligation bonds for capital and operating appropriations acts.
For the purpose of providing funds to finance the projects described and authorized by the legislature in the capital and operating appropriations acts for the 1995-97 fiscal biennium only, and all costs incidental thereto, the state finance committee is authorized to issue general obligation bonds of the state of Washington in the sum of eight hundred sixty-seven million one hundred sixty thousand dollars, or as much thereof as may be required, to finance these projects and all costs incidental thereto. Bonds authorized in this section may be sold at such price as the state finance committee shall determine. No bonds authorized in this section may be offered for sale without prior legislative appropriation of the net proceeds of the sale of the bonds.

\[ [1997 c 456 § 41](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/1997-98/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/Senate/6064-S.SL.pdf?cite=1997%20c%20456%20§%2041); [1995 2nd sp.s. c 17 § 1](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/1995-96/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/House/1071-S.SL.pdf?cite=1995%202nd%20sp.s.%20c%2017%20§%201); \]

## 43.99K.020 - Conditions and limitations.
The proceeds from the sale of the bonds authorized in RCW 43.99K.010 shall be deposited in the state building construction account created by RCW 43.83.020. The proceeds shall be transferred as follows:

1. Seven hundred eighty-five million four hundred thirty-eight thousand dollars to remain in the state building construction account created by RCW 43.83.020;

2. Twenty-two million five hundred thousand dollars to the outdoor recreation account created by RCW 79A.25.060;

3. Twenty-one million one hundred thousand dollars to the habitat conservation account created by RCW 79A.15.020;

4. Two million nine hundred twelve thousand dollars to the public safety reimbursable bond account; and

5. Ten million dollars to the higher education construction account created by RCW 43.83.310.

These proceeds shall be used exclusively for the purposes specified in this section and for the payment of expenses incurred in the issuance and sale of the bonds issued for the purposes of this section, and shall be administered by the office of financial management subject to legislative appropriation.

\[ [2015 1st sp.s. c 4 § 44](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/2015-16/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/House/1859.SL.pdf?cite=2015%201st%20sp.s.%20c%204%20§%2044); [1997 c 456 § 42](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/1997-98/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/Senate/6064-S.SL.pdf?cite=1997%20c%20456%20§%2042); [1995 2nd sp.s. c 17 § 2](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/1995-96/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/House/1071-S.SL.pdf?cite=1995%202nd%20sp.s.%20c%2017%20§%202); \]

## 43.99K.030 - Retirement of bonds—Reimbursement of general fund—Pledge and promise—Remedies.
1. [Empty]

    a.  The debt-limit general fund bond retirement account shall be used for the payment of the principal of and interest on the bonds authorized in RCW 43.99K.020 (1), (2), and (3).

    b.  The debt-limit reimbursable bond retirement account shall be used for the payment of the principal of and interest on the bonds authorized in RCW 43.99K.020(4).

    c.  The nondebt-limit reimbursable bond retirement account shall be used for the payment of the principal of and interest on the bonds authorized in RCW 43.99K.020(5).

2. The state finance committee shall, on or before June 30th of each year, certify to the state treasurer the amount needed in the ensuing twelve months to meet the bond retirement and interest requirements. On each date on which any interest or principal and interest payment is due, the state treasurer shall withdraw from any general state revenues received in the state treasury and deposit in the debt-limit general fund bond retirement account, debt-limit reimbursable bond retirement account, nondebt-limit reimbursable bond retirement account, as necessary, an amount equal to the amount certified by the state finance committee to be due on the payment date.

3. On each date on which any interest or principal and interest payment is due on bonds issued for the purposes of RCW 43.99K.020(5), the board of regents of the University of Washington shall cause to be paid out of University of Washington nonappropriated local funds to the state treasurer for deposit into the general fund of the state treasury the amount computed in subsection (2) of this section for bonds issued for the purposes of RCW 43.99K.020(5).

4. Bonds issued under this section and RCW 43.99K.010 and 43.99K.020 shall state that they are a general obligation of the state of Washington, shall pledge the full faith and credit of the state to the payment of the principal thereof and the interest thereon, and shall contain an unconditional promise to pay the principal and interest as the same shall become due.

5. The owner and holder of each of the bonds or the trustee for the owner and holder of any of the bonds may by mandamus or other appropriate proceeding require the transfer and payment of funds as directed in this section.

\[ [2009 c 479 § 33](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/2009-10/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/Senate/5073-S.SL.pdf?cite=2009%20c%20479%20§%2033); [2005 c 487 § 8](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/2005-06/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/House/2299-S.SL.pdf?cite=2005%20c%20487%20§%208); [1997 c 456 § 23](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/1997-98/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/Senate/6064-S.SL.pdf?cite=1997%20c%20456%20§%2023); [1995 2nd sp.s. c 17 § 3](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/1995-96/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/House/1071-S.SL.pdf?cite=1995%202nd%20sp.s.%20c%2017%20§%203); \]

## 43.99K.040 - Additional means for payment of principal and interest.
The legislature may provide additional means for raising moneys for the payment of the principal of and interest on the bonds authorized in RCW 43.99K.010, and RCW 43.99K.030 shall not be deemed to provide an exclusive method for the payment.

\[ [1995 2nd sp.s. c 17 § 4](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/1995-96/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/House/1071-S.SL.pdf?cite=1995%202nd%20sp.s.%20c%2017%20§%204); \]

## 43.99K.050 - Legal investment.
The bonds authorized in RCW 43.99K.010 shall be a legal investment for all state funds or funds under state control and for all funds of any other public body.

\[ [1995 2nd sp.s. c 17 § 5](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/1995-96/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/House/1071-S.SL.pdf?cite=1995%202nd%20sp.s.%20c%2017%20§%205); \]

