# 43.81 - State-owned living facilities.
* [43.81.010 - Legislative declaration.](#4381010---legislative-declaration)
* [43.81.020 - Availability of state-owned or leased living facilities.](#4381020---availability-of-state-owned-or-leased-living-facilities)
* [43.81.030 - Rent—Custodial housekeeping—Damages.](#4381030---rentcustodial-housekeepingdamages)
* [43.81.040 - Maintenance in safe, healthful condition.](#4381040---maintenance-in-safe-healthful-condition)
## 43.81.010 - Legislative declaration.
The legislature recognizes that significant benefits accrue to the state and that certain types of state operations are more efficient when personnel services are available on an extended basis. Such operations include certain types of facilities managed by agencies such as the departments of natural resources, corrections, fish and wildlife, social and health services, transportation, and veterans affairs, and the parks and recreation commission.

The means of assuring that such personnel are available on an extended basis is through the establishment of on-site state-owned or leased living facilities. The legislature also recognizes the restrictions and hardship placed upon those personnel who are required to reside in such state-owned or leased living facilities in order to provide extended personnel services.

The legislature further recognizes that there are instances where it is to the benefit of the state to have state-owned or leased living facilities occupied even though such occupancy is not required by the agency as a condition of employment.

\[ [1994 c 264 § 27](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/1993-94/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/House/2590.SL.pdf?cite=1994%20c%20264%20§%2027); [1988 c 36 § 19](https://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1988c36.pdf?cite=1988%20c%2036%20§%2019); [1985 c 463 § 1](https://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1985c463.pdf?cite=1985%20c%20463%20§%201); \]

## 43.81.020 - Availability of state-owned or leased living facilities.
1. Whenever an agency requires that an employee reside in state-owned or leased living facilities as a condition of employment, such living facilities shall be made available to the employee under the conditions set forth in RCW 43.81.030 and 43.81.040.

2. Whenever an agency determines that (a) a living facility owned or leased by the agency is not occupied by employees under subsection (1) of this section and (b) it would be to the agency's benefit to have the facility occupied by an employee of the agency whose duties involve extended personnel services associated with the work site upon which the living facility is located or at work site near to where the living facility is located, the agency may make the facility available to such employee.

3. Whenever an agency determines that (a) a living facility owned or leased by the agency is not occupied by employees under subsection (1) of this section and (b) the facility has been made available to employees under subsection (2) of this section and that no such employees have opted to reside in the facility, the agency may make the facility available for occupancy to other interested parties.

\[ [1985 c 463 § 2](https://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1985c463.pdf?cite=1985%20c%20463%20§%202); \]

## 43.81.030 - Rent—Custodial housekeeping—Damages.
1. No rent may be charged to persons living in facilities provided under RCW 43.81.020(1). Such employees shall pay the costs of utilities associated with the living facility.

2. Any person occupying state-owned or leased living facilities shall do so with the understanding that he or she assumes custodial housekeeping responsibility as directed by the agency. Such responsibility shall not include maintenance, repairs, or improvements to the facilities. An occupant of a state-owned or leased facility is liable for damages to the facility in excess of normal wear and tear.

\[ [1989 c 11 § 16](https://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1989c11.pdf?cite=1989%20c%2011%20§%2016); [1985 c 463 § 3](https://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1985c463.pdf?cite=1985%20c%20463%20§%203); \]

## 43.81.040 - Maintenance in safe, healthful condition.
The state shall maintain living facilities occupied under RCW 43.81.020 in a safe, healthful condition.

\[ [1985 c 463 § 4](https://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1985c463.pdf?cite=1985%20c%20463%20§%204); \]

