# 43.88A - Legislative fiscal notes.
* [43.88A.010 - Legislative declaration.](#4388a010---legislative-declaration)
* [43.88A.020 - Preparation—Ongoing cost projections—Duties of office of financial management—School district fiscal notes.](#4388a020---preparationongoing-cost-projectionsduties-of-office-of-financial-managementschool-district-fiscal-notes)
* [43.88A.030 - Distribution of fiscal notes and cost projections.](#4388a030---distribution-of-fiscal-notes-and-cost-projections)
* [43.88A.040 - Fiscal notes—Preparation upon request of any legislator.](#4388a040---fiscal-notespreparation-upon-request-of-any-legislator)
* [43.88A.900 - Construction of chapter.](#4388a900---construction-of-chapter)
## 43.88A.010 - Legislative declaration.
The legislature hereby recognizes the necessity of developing a uniform and coordinated procedure for determining the expected fiscal impact of bills and resolutions on state government. The legislature also recognizes that developing such statements of fiscal impact, which shall be known as fiscal notes, requires the designation of a state agency to be principally responsible therefor.

\[ [1977 ex.s. c 25 § 1](https://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1977ex1c25.pdf?cite=1977%20ex.s.%20c%2025%20§%201); \]

## 43.88A.020 - Preparation—Ongoing cost projections—Duties of office of financial management—School district fiscal notes.
The office of financial management shall, in cooperation with appropriate legislative committees and legislative staff, establish a procedure for the provision of fiscal notes on the expected impact of bills and resolutions which increase or decrease or tend to increase or decrease state government revenues or expenditures. Such fiscal notes shall indicate by fiscal year the impact for the remainder of the biennium in which the bill or resolution will first take effect as well as a cumulative forecast of the fiscal impact for the succeeding four fiscal years. Fiscal notes shall separately identify the fiscal impacts on the operating and capital budgets. Estimates of fiscal impacts shall be calculated using the procedures contained in the fiscal note instructions issued by the office of financial management.

In establishing the fiscal impact called for pursuant to this chapter, the office of financial management shall coordinate the development of fiscal notes with all state agencies affected.

The preparation and dissemination of the ongoing cost projections and other requirements of RCW 43.135.031 for bills increasing taxes or fees shall take precedence over fiscal notes.

For proposed legislation that uniquely affects school districts, in addition to any fiscal note prepared under this chapter, a school district fiscal note must be prepared under the process established in RCW 28A.300.0401.

\[ [2011 c 140 § 1](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/2011-12/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/House/1703.SL.pdf?cite=2011%20c%20140%20§%201); 2008 c 1 § 3 (Initiative Measure No. 960, approved November 6, 2007); [1994 c 219 § 3](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/1993-94/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/House/2237-S.SL.pdf?cite=1994%20c%20219%20§%203); [1979 c 151 § 146](https://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1979c151.pdf?cite=1979%20c%20151%20§%20146); [1977 ex.s. c 25 § 2](https://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1977ex1c25.pdf?cite=1977%20ex.s.%20c%2025%20§%202); \]

## 43.88A.030 - Distribution of fiscal notes and cost projections.
When a fiscal note is prepared and approved as to form, accuracy, and completeness by the office of financial management, which depicts the expected fiscal impact of a bill or resolution, copies shall be filed immediately with:

1. The chairperson of the committee to which the bill or resolution was referred upon introduction in the house of origin;

2. The senate committee on ways and means, or its successor; and

3. The house committees on revenue and appropriations, or their successors.

Whenever possible, such fiscal note and, in the case of a bill increasing taxes or fees, the cost projection and other information required under RCW 43.135.031 shall be provided prior to or at the time the bill or resolution is first heard by the committee of reference in the house of origin.

When a fiscal note has been prepared for a bill or resolution, a copy of the fiscal note shall be placed in the bill books or otherwise attached to the bill or resolution and shall remain with the bill or resolution throughout the legislative process insofar as possible. For bills increasing taxes or fees, the cost projection and other information required by RCW 43.135.031 shall be placed in the bill books or otherwise attached to the bill or resolution and shall remain with the bill or resolution throughout the legislative process insofar as possible.

\[ 2008 c 1 § 4 (Initiative Measure No. 960, approved November 6, 2007); [1986 c 158 § 16](https://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1986c158.pdf?cite=1986%20c%20158%20§%2016); [1979 ex.s. c 112 § 1](https://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1979ex1c112.pdf?cite=1979%20ex.s.%20c%20112%20§%201); [1979 c 151 § 147](https://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1979c151.pdf?cite=1979%20c%20151%20§%20147); [1977 ex.s. c 25 § 3](https://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1977ex1c25.pdf?cite=1977%20ex.s.%20c%2025%20§%203); \]

## 43.88A.040 - Fiscal notes—Preparation upon request of any legislator.
The office of financial management shall also provide a fiscal note on any legislative proposal at the request of any legislator. Such fiscal note shall be returned to the requesting legislator, and copies shall be filed with the appropriate legislative committees pursuant to RCW 43.88A.030 at the time such proposed legislation is introduced in either house.

\[ [1979 c 151 § 148](https://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1979c151.pdf?cite=1979%20c%20151%20§%20148); [1977 ex.s. c 25 § 4](https://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1977ex1c25.pdf?cite=1977%20ex.s.%20c%2025%20§%204); \]

## 43.88A.900 - Construction of chapter.
Nothing in this chapter shall prevent either house of the legislature from acting on any bill or resolution before it as otherwise provided by the state Constitution, by law, and by the rules and joint rules of the senate and house of representatives, nor shall the lack of any fiscal note as provided in this chapter or any error in the accuracy thereof affect the validity of any measure otherwise duly passed by the legislature.

\[ [1977 ex.s. c 25 § 5](https://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1977ex1c25.pdf?cite=1977%20ex.s.%20c%2025%20§%205); \]

