# 43.300 - Department of fish and wildlife.
* [43.300.005 - Purpose.](#43300005---purpose)
* [43.300.010 - Department created—Transfer of powers, duties, and functions.](#43300010---department-createdtransfer-of-powers-duties-and-functions)
* [43.300.020 - Definitions.](#43300020---definitions)
* [43.300.040 - Director's duties.](#43300040---directors-duties)
* [43.300.050 - Exempt positions.](#43300050---exempt-positions)
* [43.300.060 - Enforcement in accordance with RCW  43.05.100 and  43.05.110.](#43300060---enforcement-in-accordance-with-rcw--4305100-and--4305110)
* [43.300.070 - Exchange of tidelands with private or public landowners.](#43300070---exchange-of-tidelands-with-private-or-public-landowners)
* [43.300.080 - Cost-reimbursement agreements.](#43300080---cost-reimbursement-agreements)
* [43.300.090 - Notification requirements.](#43300090---notification-requirements)
* [43.300.900 - Effective date—1993 sp.s. c 2 §§ 1-6, 8-59, and 61-79.](#43300900---effective-date1993-sps-c-2--1-6-8-59-and-61-79)
## 43.300.005 - Purpose.
Perpetuation of fish and wildlife in Washington requires clear, efficient, streamlined, scientific, management from a single state fish and wildlife agency. Such a consolidation will focus existing funds for the greatest protection of species and stocks. It will bring combined resources to bear on securing, managing, and enhancing habitats. It will simplify licensing, amplify research, increase field staff, avoid duplication, and magnify enforcement of laws and rules. It will provide all fishers, hunters, and observers of fish and wildlife with a single source of consistent policies, procedures, and access.

\[ [1993 sp.s. c 2 § 1](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/1993-94/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/House/2055-S.SL.pdf?cite=1993%20sp.s.%20c%202%20§%201); \]

## 43.300.010 - Department created—Transfer of powers, duties, and functions.
There is hereby created a department of state government to be known as the department of fish and wildlife. The department shall be vested with all powers and duties transferred to it under this chapter and such other powers and duties as may be authorized by law. All powers, duties, and functions of the department of fisheries and the department of wildlife are transferred to the department of fish and wildlife. All references in the Revised Code of Washington to the director or the department of fisheries or the director or department of wildlife shall be construed to mean the director or department of fish and wildlife.

\[ [1993 sp.s. c 2 § 2](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/1993-94/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/House/2055-S.SL.pdf?cite=1993%20sp.s.%20c%202%20§%202); \]

## 43.300.020 - Definitions.
As used in this chapter, unless the context indicates otherwise:

1. "Department" means the department of fish and wildlife.

2. "Director" means the director of fish and wildlife.

3. "Commission" means the fish and wildlife commission.

\[ [1993 sp.s. c 2 § 3](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/1993-94/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/House/2055-S.SL.pdf?cite=1993%20sp.s.%20c%202%20§%203); \]

## 43.300.040 - Director's duties.
In addition to other powers and duties granted or transferred to the director, the commission may delegate to the director any of the powers and duties vested in the commission.

\[ [1996 c 267 § 33](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/1995-96/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/House/2793-S.SL.pdf?cite=1996%20c%20267%20§%2033); [1993 sp.s. c 2 § 5](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/1993-94/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/House/2055-S.SL.pdf?cite=1993%20sp.s.%20c%202%20§%205); \]

## 43.300.050 - Exempt positions.
The director shall appoint such deputy directors, assistant directors, and up to seven special assistants as may be needed to administer the department. These employees are exempt from the provisions of chapter 41.06 RCW.

\[ [1993 sp.s. c 2 § 6](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/1993-94/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/House/2055-S.SL.pdf?cite=1993%20sp.s.%20c%202%20§%206); \]

## 43.300.060 - Enforcement in accordance with RCW  43.05.100 and  43.05.110.
Enforcement action taken after July 23, 1995, by the director or the department shall be in accordance with RCW 43.05.100 and 43.05.110.

\[ [1995 c 403 § 627](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/1995-96/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/House/1010-S.SL.pdf?cite=1995%20c%20403%20§%20627); \]

## 43.300.070 - Exchange of tidelands with private or public landowners.
1. The department of fish and wildlife may exchange the tidelands and shorelands it manages with private or public landowners if the exchange is in the public interest.

2. As used in this section, an exchange of tidelands and shorelands is in the public interest if the exchange would provide significant fish and wildlife habitat or public access to the state's waterways.

\[ [1997 c 209 § 3](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/1997-98/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/House/1017-S.SL.pdf?cite=1997%20c%20209%20§%203); \]

## 43.300.080 - Cost-reimbursement agreements.
1. The department may enter into a written cost-reimbursement agreement with a permit applicant or project proponent to recover from the applicant or proponent the reasonable costs incurred by the department in carrying out the requirements of this chapter, as well as the requirements of other relevant laws, as they relate to permit coordination, environmental review, application review, technical studies, and permit processing.

2. The cost-reimbursement agreement shall identify the tasks and costs for work to be conducted under the agreement. The agreement must include a schedule that states:

    a. The estimated number of weeks for initial review of the permit application;

    b. The estimated number of revision cycles;

    c. The estimated number of weeks for review of subsequent revision submittals;

    d. The estimated number of billable hours of employee time;

    e. The rate per hour; and

    f. A date for revision of the agreement if necessary.

3. The written cost-reimbursement agreement shall be negotiated with the permit applicant or project proponent. Under the provisions of a cost-reimbursement agreement, funds from the applicant shall be used by the department to contract with an independent consultant to carry out the work covered by the cost-reimbursement agreement. The department may also use funds provided under a cost-reimbursement agreement to hire temporary employees, to assign current staff to review the work of the consultant, to provide necessary technical assistance when an independent consultant with comparable technical skills is unavailable, and to recover reasonable and necessary direct and indirect costs that arise from processing the permit. The department shall, in developing the agreement, ensure that final decisions that involve policy matters are made by the agency and not by the consultant. The department shall make an estimate of the number of permanent staff hours to process the permits, and shall contract with consultants or hire temporary employees to replace the time and functions committed by these permanent staff to the project. The billing process shall provide for accurate time and cost accounting and may include a billing cycle that provides for progress payments.

4. The cost-reimbursement agreement must not negatively impact the processing of other permit applications. In order to maintain permit processing capacity, the agency may hire outside consultants, temporary employees, or make internal administrative changes. Consultants or temporary employees hired as part of a cost-reimbursement agreement or to maintain agency capacity are hired as agents of the state not of the permit applicant. The restrictions of chapter 42.52 RCW apply to any cost-reimbursement agreement, and to any person hired as a result of a cost-reimbursement agreement.

\[ [2009 c 97 § 11](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/2009-10/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/House/1730-S.SL.pdf?cite=2009%20c%2097%20§%2011); [2007 c 94 § 13](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/2007-08/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/Senate/5122-S2.SL.pdf?cite=2007%20c%2094%20§%2013); [2003 c 70 § 4](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/2003-04/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/House/1526.SL.pdf?cite=2003%20c%2070%20§%204); [2000 c 251 § 5](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/1999-00/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/Senate/6277-S.SL.pdf?cite=2000%20c%20251%20§%205); \]

## 43.300.090 - Notification requirements.
Actions under this chapter are subject to the notification requirements of RCW 43.17.400.

\[ [2007 c 62 § 6](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/2007-08/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/House/1940.SL.pdf?cite=2007%20c%2062%20§%206); \]

## 43.300.900 - Effective date—1993 sp.s. c 2 §§ 1-6, 8-59, and 61-79.
Sections 1 through 6, 8 through 59, and 61 through 79, chapter 2, Laws of 1993 sp. sess. shall take effect March 1, 1994.

\[ [1994 c 6 § 4](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/1993-94/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/Senate/6346.SL.pdf?cite=1994%20c%206%20§%204); [1993 sp.s. c 2 § 102](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/1993-94/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/House/2055-S.SL.pdf?cite=1993%20sp.s.%20c%202%20§%20102); \]

