# 43.392 - Interagency electric vehicle coordinating council.
* [43.392.010 - Findings—Intent.](#43392010---findingsintent)
* [43.392.020 - Target established—Scoping plan.](#43392020---target-establishedscoping-plan)
* [43.392.030 - Interagency electric vehicle coordinating council.](#43392030---interagency-electric-vehicle-coordinating-council)
* [43.392.040 - Council responsibilities—Annual report.](#43392040---council-responsibilitiesannual-report)
## 43.392.010 - Findings—Intent.
The legislature finds that in order to meet the statewide greenhouse gas emissions limits in RCW 70A.45.020 and 70A.45.050, the state must drastically reduce vehicle greenhouse gas emissions. A critical strategy to meet those goals is transitioning to zero emissions vehicles and this transition requires ongoing purposeful interagency coordination and cooperation. As such, it is the intent of the legislature to create a formal interagency council responsible for coordinating the state's transportation electrification efforts to ensure the state is leveraging state and federal resources to the best extent possible and to ensure zero emissions incentives, infrastructure, and opportunities are available and accessible to all Washingtonians.

The legislature further finds that in order to meet the statewide greenhouse gas emissions limits in the transportation sector of the economy, more resources must be directed toward achieving zero emissions transportation and transit, while continuing to relieve energy burdens that exist in overburdened communities.

\[ [2022 c 182 § 427](https://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/2021-22/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/Senate/5974-S.SL.pdf?cite=2022%20c%20182%20§%20427); \]

## 43.392.020 - Target established—Scoping plan.
1. A target is established for the state that all publicly owned and privately owned passenger and light duty vehicles of model year 2030 or later that are sold, purchased, or registered in Washington state be electric vehicles.

2. On or before December 31, 2023, the interagency electric vehicle coordinating council created in RCW 43.392.030 shall complete a scoping plan for achieving the 2030 target.

\[ [2022 c 182 § 415](https://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/2021-22/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/Senate/5974-S.SL.pdf?cite=2022%20c%20182%20§%20415); \]

## 43.392.030 - Interagency electric vehicle coordinating council.
1. There is hereby created an interagency electric vehicle coordinating council jointly led by the Washington state department of commerce and the Washington state department of transportation with participation from the following agencies:

   a. The office of financial management;

   b. The department of ecology;

   c. The department of enterprise services;

   d. The state efficiency and environmental performance office;

   e. The department of agriculture;

   f. The department of health;

   g. The utilities and transportation commission;

   h. A representative from the office of the superintendent of public instruction knowledgeable on issues pertaining to student transportation; and

   i. Other agencies with key roles in electrifying the transportation sector.

2. The Washington state department of commerce and Washington state department of transportation shall assign staff in each agency to lead the council's coordination work and provide ongoing reports to the governor and legislature including, but not limited to, the transportation, energy, economic development, and other appropriate legislative committees.

\[ [2022 c 182 § 428](https://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/2021-22/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/Senate/5974-S.SL.pdf?cite=2022%20c%20182%20§%20428); \]

## 43.392.040 - Council responsibilities—Annual report.
1. Interagency electric vehicle coordinating council responsibilities include, but are not limited to:

   a. Development of a statewide transportation electrification strategy to ensure market and infrastructure readiness for all new vehicle sales;

   b. Identification of all electric vehicle infrastructure grant-related funding to include existing and future opportunities, including state, federal, and other funds;

   c. Coordination of grant funding criteria across agency grant programs to most efficiently distribute state and federal electric vehicle-related funding in a manner that is most beneficial to the state, advances best practices, and recommends additional criteria that could be useful in advancing transportation electrification;

   d. Development of a robust public and private outreach plan that includes engaging with:

      i. Community organizers and the environmental justice council to develop community-driven programs to address zero emissions transportation needs and priorities in overburdened communities; and

      ii. Local governments to explore procurement opportunities and work with local government and community programs to support electrification;

   e. Creation of an industry electric vehicle advisory committee; and

   f. Ensuring the statewide transportation electrification strategy, grant distribution, programs, and activities associated with advancing transportation electrification benefit vulnerable and overburdened communities.

2. The council shall provide an annual report to the appropriate committees of the legislature summarizing electric vehicle implementation progress, gaps, and resource needs.

\[ [2022 c 182 § 429](https://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/2021-22/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/Senate/5974-S.SL.pdf?cite=2022%20c%20182%20§%20429); \]

