# 43.384 - Tourism marketing authority.
* [43.384.010 - Definitions.](#43384010---definitions)
* [43.384.020 - Established—Duties—Administrative assistance.](#43384020---establisheddutiesadministrative-assistance)
* [43.384.030 - Board of directors—Membership—Advisory committee—Procedures.](#43384030---board-of-directorsmembershipadvisory-committeeprocedures)
* [43.384.040 - Statewide tourism marketing account—Matching funds.](#43384040---statewide-tourism-marketing-accountmatching-funds)
* [43.384.050 - Use of funds.](#43384050---use-of-funds)
* [43.384.060 - Receipt of gifts, grants authorized.](#43384060---receipt-of-gifts-grants-authorized)
* [43.384.800 - Evaluation by joint legislative audit and review committee.](#43384800---evaluation-by-joint-legislative-audit-and-review-committee)
* [43.384.900 - Findings—Purpose—2018 c 275.](#43384900---findingspurpose2018-c-275)
* [43.384.901 - Short title.](#43384901---short-title)
## 43.384.010 - Definitions.
The definitions in this section apply throughout this chapter unless the context clearly requires otherwise.

1. "Authority" means the Washington tourism marketing authority created in RCW 43.384.020.

2. "Board" means the Washington tourism marketing authority board of directors.

3. "Department" means the department of commerce.

4. "Director" means the director of the department of commerce.

5. "Statewide tourism marketing account" means the account created pursuant to RCW 43.384.040.

\[ [2018 c 275 § 2](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/2017-18/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/Senate/5251-S4.SL.pdf?cite=2018%20c%20275%20§%202); \]

## 43.384.020 - Established—Duties—Administrative assistance.
1. The Washington tourism marketing authority is established as a public body constituting an instrumentality of the state of Washington.

2. The authority is responsible for contracting for statewide tourism marketing services that promote tourism on behalf of the citizens of the state, and for managing the authority's financial resources.

3. The department provides administrative assistance to the authority and serves as the fiscal agent of the authority for moneys appropriated for purposes of the authority.

4. The authority must create a private local account to receive nonstate funds and state funds, other than general fund state funds, contributed to the authority for purposes of this chapter.

\[ [2018 c 275 § 3](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/2017-18/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/Senate/5251-S4.SL.pdf?cite=2018%20c%20275%20§%203); \]

## 43.384.030 - Board of directors—Membership—Advisory committee—Procedures.
1. The authority must be governed by a board of directors. The board of directors must consist of:

    a. Two members and two alternates from the house of representatives, with one member and one alternate appointed from each of the two major caucuses of the house of representatives by the speaker of the house of representatives;

    b. Two members and two alternates from the senate, with one member and one alternate appointed from each of the two major caucuses of the senate by the president of the senate; and

    c. Nine representatives with expertise in the tourism industry and related businesses including, but not limited to, hotel, restaurant, outdoor recreation, attractions, retail, and rental car businesses appointed by the governor.

2. The initial membership of the authority must be appointed as follows:

    a. By May 1, 2018, the speaker of the house of representatives and the president of the senate must each submit to the governor a list of ten nominees who are not legislators or employees of the state or its political subdivisions, with no caucus submitting the same nominee;

    b. The nominations from the speaker of the house of representatives must include at least one representative from the restaurant industry; one representative from the rental car industry; and one representative from the retail industry;

    c. The nominations from the president of the senate must include at least one representative from the hotel industry; one representative from the attractions industry; and one representative from the outdoor recreation industry; and

    d. The remaining member appointed by the governor must have a demonstrated expertise in the tourism industry.

3. By July 1, 2018, the governor must appoint four members from each list submitted by the speaker of the house of representatives and the president of the senate under subsection (2)(a) through (c) of this section and one member under subsection (2)(d) of this section. Appointments by the governor must reflect diversity in geography, size of business, gender, and ethnicity. No county may have more than two appointments and no city may have more than one appointment.

4. There must be a nonvoting advisory committee to the board. The advisory committee must consist of:

    a. One ex officio representative from the department, state parks and recreation commission, department of transportation, and other state agencies as the authority deems appropriate; and

    b. One member from a federally recognized Indian tribe appointed by the director of the department.

5. The initial appointments under subsections (1) and (2) of this section must be appointed by the governor to terms as follows: Four members for two-year terms; four members for three-year terms; and five members for four-year terms, which must include the chair. After the initial appointments, all appointments must be for four years.

6. The board must select from its membership the chair of the board and such other officers as it deems appropriate. The chair of the board must be a member from the tourism industry or related businesses.

7. A majority of the board constitutes a quorum.

8. The board must create its own bylaws in accordance with the laws of the state of Washington.

9. Any member of the board may be removed for misfeasance, malfeasance, or willful neglect of duty after notice and a public hearing, unless the notice and hearing are expressly waived in writing by the affected member.

10. If a vacancy occurs on the board, a replacement must be appointed for the unexpired term.

11. The members of the board serve without compensation but are entitled to reimbursement, solely from the funds of the authority, for expenses incurred in the discharge of their duties.

12. The board must meet at least quarterly.

13. No board member of the authority may serve on the board of an organization that could be considered for a contract authorized under RCW 43.384.050.

\[ [2018 c 275 § 4](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/2017-18/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/Senate/5251-S4.SL.pdf?cite=2018%20c%20275%20§%204); \]

## 43.384.040 - Statewide tourism marketing account—Matching funds.
The statewide tourism marketing account is created in the state treasury. All receipts from tax revenues under RCW 82.08.225 must be deposited into the account. Moneys in the account may be spent only after appropriation. Expenditures from the account may be used only for expenditures of the department that are related to implementation of a statewide tourism marketing program and operation of the authority. A two-to-one nonstate or state fund, other than general fund state, match must be provided for all expenditures from the account. A match may consist of nonstate or state fund, other than general fund state, cash contributions deposited in the private local account created under RCW 43.384.020(4), the value of an advertising equivalency contribution, or an in-kind contribution. The board must determine criteria for what qualifies as an in-kind contribution.

\[ [2018 c 275 § 5](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/2017-18/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/Senate/5251-S4.SL.pdf?cite=2018%20c%20275%20§%205); \]

## 43.384.050 - Use of funds.
1. From amounts appropriated to the department for the authority and from other moneys available to it, the authority may incur expenditures for any purpose specifically authorized by this chapter including:

    a. Entering into a contract for a multiple year statewide tourism marketing plan with a statewide nonprofit organization existing on June 7, 2018, whose sole purpose is marketing Washington to tourists. The marketing plan must include, but is not limited to, focuses on rural tourism-dependent counties, natural wonders and outdoor recreation opportunities of the state, including sustainable whale watching, attraction of international tourists, identification of local offerings for tourists, and assistance for tourism areas adversely impacted by natural disasters. In the event that no such organization exists on June 7, 2018, or the initial contractor ceases to exist, the authority may determine criteria for a contractor to carry out a statewide marketing program;

    b. Contracting for the evaluation of the impact of the statewide tourism marketing program; and

    c. Paying for administrative expenses of the authority, which may not exceed two percent of the state portion of funds collected in any fiscal year.

2. All nonstate moneys received by the authority under RCW 43.384.060 or otherwise provided to the authority for purposes of matching funding must be deposited in the authority's private local account created under RCW 43.384.020(4) and are held in trust for uses authorized solely by this chapter.

3. "Sustainable whale watching" means an experience that includes whale watching from land or aboard a vessel that reduces the impact on whales, provides a recreational and educational experience, and motivates participants to care about marine mammals, the sea, and marine conservation.

\[ [2019 c 291 § 5](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/2019-20/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/Senate/5577-S2.SL.pdf?cite=2019%20c%20291%20§%205); [2018 c 275 § 6](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/2017-18/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/Senate/5251-S4.SL.pdf?cite=2018%20c%20275%20§%206); \]

## 43.384.060 - Receipt of gifts, grants authorized.
The board may receive gifts, grants, or endowments from public or private sources that are made from time to time, in trust or otherwise, for the use and benefit of the purposes of the authority and spend gift, grants, or endowments or income from public or private sources according to their terms, unless the receipt of gifts, grants, or endowments violates RCW 42.17A.560.

\[ [2018 c 275 § 7](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/2017-18/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/Senate/5251-S4.SL.pdf?cite=2018%20c%20275%20§%207); \]

## 43.384.800 - Evaluation by joint legislative audit and review committee.
The joint legislative audit and review committee must conduct an evaluation of the performance of the authority created in chapter 43.384 RCW and report its findings and recommendations, in compliance with RCW 43.01.036, to the governor and the economic development committees of the senate and house of representatives by December 1, 2023. The purpose of the evaluation is to determine the extent to which the authority has contributed to the growth of the tourism industry and economic development of the state. An interim report by the authority, submitted in compliance with RCW 43.01.036, is due to the governor and economic development committees of the house of representatives and senate by December 1, 2021. The report must provide an update on the authority's progress in implementing a statewide tourism marketing program.

\[ [2018 c 275 § 11](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/2017-18/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/Senate/5251-S4.SL.pdf?cite=2018%20c%20275%20§%2011); \]

## 43.384.900 - Findings—Purpose—2018 c 275.
1. The legislature finds that the tourism industry is the fourth largest economic sector in the state of Washington and provides general economic benefit to the state. Since 2011 there have been minimal general funds committed to statewide tourism marketing and Washington is the only state without a state-funded tourism marketing program. Before 2011, the amount of funds appropriated to statewide tourism marketing was not significant and, in fact, Washington ranked forty-eighth in state tourism funding. Washington has significant attractions and activities for tourists, including many natural outdoor assets that draw visitors to mountains, waterways, parks, and open spaces. There should be a program to publicize these assets and activities to potential out-of-state visitors that is implemented in an expeditious manner by tourism professionals in the private sector.

2. The purpose of chapter 275, Laws of 2018 is to establish the framework and funding for a statewide tourism marketing program. The program needs to have a structure that includes significant, stable, long-term funding, and it should be implemented and managed by the tourism industry. The source of funds should be from major sectors of the tourism industry with government assistance in collecting these funds and providing accountability for their expenditure. The dedicated sales tax authorized for contributions made in this chapter will bring direct benefits to those making contributions by bringing more tourists into the state who will patronize the participating businesses and create economic benefit for the state.

\[ [2018 c 275 § 1](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/2017-18/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/Senate/5251-S4.SL.pdf?cite=2018%20c%20275%20§%201); \]

## 43.384.901 - Short title.
This chapter may be known and cited as the statewide tourism marketing act.

\[ [2018 c 275 § 8](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/2017-18/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/Senate/5251-S4.SL.pdf?cite=2018%20c%20275%20§%208); \]

