# 43.950 - Construction.
* [43.950.010 - Continuation of existing law.](#43950010---continuation-of-existing-law)
* [43.950.020 - Title, chapter, section headings not part of law.](#43950020---title-chapter-section-headings-not-part-of-law)
* [43.950.030 - Invalidity of part of title not to affect remainder.](#43950030---invalidity-of-part-of-title-not-to-affect-remainder)
* [43.950.040 - Repeals and saving.](#43950040---repeals-and-saving)
## 43.950.010 - Continuation of existing law.
The provisions of this title insofar as they are substantially the same as statutory provisions repealed by this chapter, and relating to the same subject matter, shall be construed as restatements and continuations, and not as new enactments. Nothing in this 1965 reenactment of this title shall be construed as authorizing any new bond issues or new or additional appropriations of moneys but the bond issue authorizations herein contained shall be construed only as continuations of bond issues authorized by prior laws herein repealed and reenacted, and the appropriations of moneys herein contained are continued herein for historical purposes only and this act shall not be construed as a reappropriation thereof and no appropriation contained herein shall be deemed to be extended or revived hereby and such appropriation shall lapse or shall have lapsed in accordance with the original enactment.

\[ [1965 c 8 § 43.198.010](http://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1965c8.pdf?cite=1965%20c%208%20§%2043.198.010); \]

## 43.950.020 - Title, chapter, section headings not part of law.
Title headings, chapter headings, and section or subsection headings, as used in this title do not constitute any part of the law.

\[ [1965 c 8 § 43.198.020](http://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1965c8.pdf?cite=1965%20c%208%20§%2043.198.020); \]

## 43.950.030 - Invalidity of part of title not to affect remainder.
If any provision of this title, or its application to any person or circumstance is held invalid, the remainder of the title, or the application of the provision to other persons or circumstances is not affected.

\[ [1965 c 8 § 43.198.030](http://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1965c8.pdf?cite=1965%20c%208%20§%2043.198.030); \]

## 43.950.040 - Repeals and saving.
See 1965 c 8 s 43.198.040. Formerly RCW 43.198.040.

\[ \]

