# 28A.200 - Home-based instruction.
* [28A.200.010 - Home-based instruction—Duties of parents—Exemptions from state learning goals, state learning standards, and high school assessments.](#28a200010---home-based-instructionduties-of-parentsexemptions-from-state-learning-goals-state-learning-standards-and-high-school-assessments)
* [28A.200.020 - Home-based instruction—Certain decisions responsibility of parent unless otherwise specified.](#28a200020---home-based-instructioncertain-decisions-responsibility-of-parent-unless-otherwise-specified)
* [28A.200.030 - Condensed compliance reports—Second-class districts.](#28a200030---condensed-compliance-reportssecond-class-districts)
## 28A.200.010 - Home-based instruction—Duties of parents—Exemptions from state learning goals, state learning standards, and high school assessments.
1. Each parent whose child is receiving home-based instruction under RCW 28A.225.010(4) shall have the duty to:

   a. File annually a signed declaration of intent that he or she is planning to cause his or her child to receive home-based instruction. The statement shall include the name and age of the child, shall specify whether a certificated person will be supervising the instruction, and shall be written in a format prescribed by the superintendent of public instruction. Each parent shall file the statement by September 15th of the school year or within two weeks of the beginning of any public school quarter, trimester, or semester with the superintendent of the public school district within which the parent resides or the district that accepts the transfer, and the student shall be deemed a transfer student of the nonresident district. Parents may apply for transfer under RCW 28A.225.220;

   b. Ensure that test scores or annual academic progress assessments and immunization records, together with any other records that are kept relating to the instructional and educational activities provided, are forwarded to any other public or private school to which the child transfers. At the time of a transfer to a public school, the superintendent of the local school district in which the child enrolls may require a standardized achievement test to be administered and shall have the authority to determine the appropriate grade and course level placement of the child after consultation with parents and review of the child's records; and

   c. Ensure that a standardized achievement test approved by the state board of education is administered annually to the child by a qualified individual or that an annual assessment of the student's academic progress is written by a certificated person who is currently working in the field of education. The state board of education shall not require these children to meet the student learning goals, learn the state learning standards, or take the assessments under RCW 28A.655.070. The standardized test administered or the annual academic progress assessment written shall be made a part of the child's permanent records. If, as a result of the annual test or assessment, it is determined that the child is not making reasonable progress consistent with his or her age or stage of development, the parent shall make a good faith effort to remedy any deficiency.

2. Failure of a parent to comply with the duties in this section shall be deemed a failure of such parent's child to attend school without valid justification under RCW 28A.225.020. Parents who do comply with the duties set forth in this section shall be presumed to be providing home-based instruction as set forth in RCW 28A.225.010(4).

\[ [2019 c 252 § 109](https://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/2019-20/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/House/1599-S2.SL.pdf?cite=2019%20c%20252%20§%20109); [2004 c 19 § 107](https://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/2003-04/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/House/2195-S.SL.pdf?cite=2004%20c%2019%20§%20107); [1995 c 52 § 1](https://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/1995-96/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/Senate/5479-S.SL.pdf?cite=1995%20c%2052%20§%201); [1993 c 336 § 1103](https://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/1993-94/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/House/1209-S.SL.pdf?cite=1993%20c%20336%20§%201103); [1990 c 33 § 178](https://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1990c33.pdf?cite=1990%20c%2033%20§%20178); [1985 c 441 § 2](https://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1985c441.pdf?cite=1985%20c%20441%20§%202); \]

## 28A.200.020 - Home-based instruction—Certain decisions responsibility of parent unless otherwise specified.
The state hereby recognizes that parents who are causing their children to receive home-based instruction under RCW 28A.225.010(4) shall be subject only to those minimum state laws and regulations which are necessary to insure that a sufficient basic educational opportunity is provided to the children receiving such instruction. Therefore, all decisions relating to philosophy or doctrine, selection of books, teaching materials and curriculum, and methods, timing, and place in the provision or evaluation of home-based instruction shall be the responsibility of the parent except for matters specifically referred to in this chapter.

\[ [1990 c 33 § 179](https://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1990c33.pdf?cite=1990%20c%2033%20§%20179); [1985 c 441 § 3](https://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1985c441.pdf?cite=1985%20c%20441%20§%203); \]

## 28A.200.030 - Condensed compliance reports—Second-class districts.
Any compliance reporting requirements as a result of laws in this chapter that apply to second-class districts may be submitted in accordance with RCW 28A.330.250.

\[ [2011 c 45 § 11](https://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/2011-12/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/Senate/5184-S.SL.pdf?cite=2011%20c%2045%20§%2011); \]

