# 28A.605 - Parent access.
* [28A.605.010 - Removing child from school grounds during school hours.](#28a605010---removing-child-from-school-grounds-during-school-hours)
* [28A.605.020 - Parents' access to classroom or school sponsored activities—Limitation.](#28a605020---parents-access-to-classroom-or-school-sponsored-activitieslimitation)
* [28A.605.030 - Student education records—Parental review—Release of records—Procedure.](#28a605030---student-education-recordsparental-reviewrelease-of-recordsprocedure)
* [28A.605.040 - Family, school, and community partnerships—School building spaces.](#28a605040---family-school-and-community-partnershipsschool-building-spaces)
## 28A.605.010 - Removing child from school grounds during school hours.
The board of directors of each school district by rule or regulation shall set forth proper procedure to ensure that each school within their district is carrying out district policy providing that no child may be removed from any school grounds or building thereon during school hours except by a person so authorized by a parent or legal guardian having legal custody thereof, except that a student may leave secondary school grounds only in accordance with the school district's open campus policy under RCW 28A.600.035. Such rules shall be applicable to school employees or their designees who may not remove, cause to be removed, or allow to be removed, any student from school grounds without authorization from the student's parent or legal guardian unless the employee is: The student's parent, legal guardian, or immediate family member, a school employee providing school bus transportation services in accordance with chapter 28A.160 RCW, a school employee supervising an extracurricular activity in which the student is participating and the employee is providing transportation to or from the activity; or, the student is in need of emergent medical care, and the employee is unable to reach the parent for transportation of the student. School security personnel may remove a student from school grounds without parental authorization for disciplinary reasons.

Nothing in this section shall be construed to limit removal of a student from school grounds by any person acting in his or her official capacity in response to a 911 emergency call.

\[ [1997 c 411 § 1](https://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/1997-98/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/House/1086-S.SL.pdf?cite=1997%20c%20411%20§%201); [1975 1st ex.s. c 248 § 1](https://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1975ex1c248.pdf?cite=1975%201st%20ex.s.%20c%20248%20§%201); \]

## 28A.605.020 - Parents' access to classroom or school sponsored activities—Limitation.
Every school district board of directors shall, after following established procedure, adopt a policy assuring parents access to their child's classroom and/or school sponsored activities for purposes of observing class procedure, teaching material, and class conduct: PROVIDED, That such observation shall not disrupt the classroom procedure or learning activity.

\[ [1979 ex.s. c 250 § 8](https://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1979ex1c250.pdf?cite=1979%20ex.s.%20c%20250%20§%208); \]

## 28A.605.030 - Student education records—Parental review—Release of records—Procedure.
The parent or guardian of a student who is or has been in attendance at a school has the right to review all education records of the student. A school may not release the education records of a student without the written consent of the student's parent or guardian, except as authorized by RCW 28A.600.475 and the family educational and privacy rights act of 1974, 20 U.S.C. Sec. 1232g.

The board of directors of each school district shall establish a procedure for:

1. Granting the request by a parent or guardian for access to the education records of his or her child; and

2. Prohibiting the release of student information without the written consent of the student's parent or guardian, after the parent or guardian has been informed what information is being requested, who is requesting the information and why, and what will be done with the information.

The procedure adopted by the school district must be in compliance with the family educational and privacy rights act of 1974, 20 U.S.C. Sec. 1232g.

\[ [1997 c 119 § 1](https://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/1997-98/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/Senate/5603.SL.pdf?cite=1997%20c%20119%20§%201); \]

## 28A.605.040 - Family, school, and community partnerships—School building spaces.
School districts are encouraged to strengthen family, school, and community partnerships by creating spaces in school buildings, if space is available, where students and families can access the services they need, such as after-school tutoring, dental and health services, counseling, or clothing and food banks.

\[ [2010 c 235 § 701](https://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/2009-10/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/Senate/6696-S2.SL.pdf?cite=2010%20c%20235%20§%20701); \]

