# 14.07 - Municipal airports—1941 act.
* [14.07.010 - General powers—Municipal purpose and public use.](#1407010---general-powersmunicipal-purpose-and-public-use)
* [14.07.020 - Acquisition of property—Eminent domain—Exemption.](#1407020---acquisition-of-propertyeminent-domainexemption)
* [14.07.030 - Appropriation of money or conveyance of property to other municipalities.](#1407030---appropriation-of-money-or-conveyance-of-property-to-other-municipalities)
* [14.07.040 - Acts ratified and confirmed—Chapter cumulative.](#1407040---acts-ratified-and-confirmedchapter-cumulative)
## 14.07.010 - General powers—Municipal purpose and public use.
Any city, town, port district or county is hereby authorized and empowered by and through their appropriate corporate authorities to acquire, maintain and operate, within or without the boundaries of the counties in which such city, town or port district is situated, sites and other facilities for landings, terminals, housing, repair and care of dirigibles, airplanes, and seaplanes, and seaplanes for the aerial transportation of persons, property and mail or for use of military and naval aircraft, either jointly with another city, town, port district, county, the state of Washington, or the United States of America or severally, and the same is hereby declared to be a municipal purpose and a public use.

\[ [1941 c 21 § 1](https://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1941c21.pdf?cite=1941%20c%2021%20§%201); Rem. Supp. 1941 § 2722-8; [1933 ex.s. c 3 § 1](https://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1933ex1c3.pdf?cite=1933%20ex.s.%20c%203%20§%201); [1929 c 93 § 1](https://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1929c93.pdf?cite=1929%20c%2093%20§%201); [1919 c 48 § 1](https://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1919c48.pdf?cite=1919%20c%2048%20§%201); \]

## 14.07.020 - Acquisition of property—Eminent domain—Exemption.
Such municipalities may also acquire by purchase, condemnation or lease, lands and other property for said purpose and dispose of such lands and other property, including property acquired by tax foreclosure proceedings, by sale or gift for public use to any city, town, port district, county, the state of Washington or the United States of America. Any city, town, port district and county is hereby empowered to acquire lands and other property for said purpose by the exercise of the power of eminent domain under the procedure that is or shall be provided by law for the condemnation and appropriation of private property for any of their respective corporate uses, and no property shall be exempt from such condemnation, appropriation or disposition by reason of the same having been or being dedicated, appropriated, or otherwise held to public use: PROVIDED, HOWEVER, That nothing in this chapter shall authorize or entitle any city, town, port district or county to acquire by eminent domain any site or other facilities for landings, terminals, housing, repair and care of dirigibles, airplanes, and seaplanes for aerial transportation of persons, property, mail or military or naval aircraft, now or hereafter owned by any other city, town, port district or county.

\[ [1941 c 21 § 2](https://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1941c21.pdf?cite=1941%20c%2021%20§%202); Rem. Supp. 1941 § 2722-9; [1933 ex.s. c 3 § 1](https://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1933ex1c3.pdf?cite=1933%20ex.s.%20c%203%20§%201); [1929 c 93 § 1](https://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1929c93.pdf?cite=1929%20c%2093%20§%201); [1919 c 48 § 1](https://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1919c48.pdf?cite=1919%20c%2048%20§%201); \]

## 14.07.030 - Appropriation of money or conveyance of property to other municipalities.
Any city, town, port district or county is authorized and empowered by and through their corporate authorities to appropriate sums of money and pay the same to any other city, town, port district or county, or deed and convey property already owned to such city, town, port district or county, for use in acquiring and maintaining sites and other facilities for landings, terminals, housing, repair and care of dirigibles, airplanes and seaplanes for the aerial transportation of persons, property, mail or military and naval aircraft and need not require consideration other than the benefit which may be derived by the city, town, port district or county on account of the use therefor and development of such property for said purposes.

\[ [1941 c 21 § 3](https://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1941c21.pdf?cite=1941%20c%2021%20§%203); Rem. Supp. 1941 § 2722-10; \]

## 14.07.040 - Acts ratified and confirmed—Chapter cumulative.
All acts of any such municipality in the exercise or attempted exercise of any powers herein conferred are hereby ratified and confirmed. The provisions of this chapter shall be cumulative and nothing herein contained shall abridge or limit the powers of the city, town, port district or county under existing law.

\[ [1941 c 21 § 4](https://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1941c21.pdf?cite=1941%20c%2021%20§%204); Rem. Supp. 1941 § 2722-11; [1933 ex.s. c 3 § 1](https://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1933ex1c3.pdf?cite=1933%20ex.s.%20c%203%20§%201); [1929 c 93 § 1](https://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1929c93.pdf?cite=1929%20c%2093%20§%201); [1919 c 48 § 1](https://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1919c48.pdf?cite=1919%20c%2048%20§%201); \]

