# 81.54 - Railroads—Inspection of industrial crossings.
* [81.54.010 - Definitions.](#8154010---definitions)
* [81.54.020 - Annual inspection of industrial crossings.](#8154020---annual-inspection-of-industrial-crossings)
* [81.54.030 - Reimbursement of inspection cost.](#8154030---reimbursement-of-inspection-cost)
* [81.54.040 - Chapter not operative within first-class cities.](#8154040---chapter-not-operative-within-first-class-cities)
## 81.54.010 - Definitions.
The term "grade crossing" when used in this chapter means any point or place where a logging or industrial railroad crosses a highway or a highway crosses such railroad or such railroad crosses any other railroad, at a common grade.

The term "over-crossing" when used in this chapter means any point or place where a highway crosses a railroad by passing above the same.

The term "under-crossing" when used in this chapter means any point or place where a highway crosses a railroad by passing under the same.

The term "over-crossing" or "under-crossing" shall also mean any point or place where one railroad crosses another railroad not at grade.

The term "logging" or "industrial" railroad when used in this chapter shall include every railway owned or operated primarily for the purpose of carrying the property of its owners or operators or a limited class of persons, with all tracks, spurs and sidings used in connection therewith.

\[ [1961 c 14 § 81.54.010](https://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1961c14.pdf?cite=1961%20c%2014%20§%2081.54.010); [1941 c 161 § 1](https://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1941c161.pdf?cite=1941%20c%20161%20§%201); Rem. Supp. 1941 § 10511-1; \]

## 81.54.020 - Annual inspection of industrial crossings.
All grade crossings, under-crossings and over-crossings on the line of every logging and other industrial railway as herein defined shall be inspected annually by the commission as to condition, also maintenance, and safety in the interest of the public, for the purpose that the commission may, if it shall deem it necessary, require such improvements, changes and repairs as in its judgment are proper to the end that adequate safety shall be provided for the public.

\[ [1961 c 14 § 81.54.020](https://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1961c14.pdf?cite=1961%20c%2014%20§%2081.54.020); [1941 c 161 § 2](https://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1941c161.pdf?cite=1941%20c%20161%20§%202); Rem. Supp. 1941 § 10511-2; \]

## 81.54.030 - Reimbursement of inspection cost.
1. Every person operating any logging railroad or industrial railway shall, prior to July 1st of each year, file with the commission a statement showing the number of, and location, by name of highway, quarter section, section, township, and range of all crossings on his or her line and pay with the filing a fee for each crossing so reported. The commission shall, by order, fix the exact fee based on the cost of rendering such inspection service. All fees collected shall be deposited in the state treasury to the credit of the public service revolving fund. Intersections having one or more tracks shall be treated as a single crossing. Tracks separated a distance in excess of one hundred feet from the nearest track or group of tracks shall constitute an additional crossing. Where two or more independently operated railroads cross each other or the same highway intersection, each independent track shall constitute a separate crossing.

2. Every person failing to make the report and pay the fees as required by this section is guilty of a misdemeanor and in addition subject to a penalty of twenty-five dollars for each day that the fee remains unpaid after it becomes due.

\[ [2003 c 53 § 392](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/2003-04/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/Senate/5758.SL.pdf?cite=2003%20c%2053%20§%20392); [1991 c 46 § 1](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/1991-92/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/Senate/5220.SL.pdf?cite=1991%20c%2046%20§%201); [1961 c 14 § 81.54.030](https://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1961c14.pdf?cite=1961%20c%2014%20§%2081.54.030); [1951 c 111 § 1](https://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1951c111.pdf?cite=1951%20c%20111%20§%201); [1941 c 161 § 3](https://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1941c161.pdf?cite=1941%20c%20161%20§%203); Rem. Supp. 1941 § 10511-3; \]

## 81.54.040 - Chapter not operative within first-class cities.
This chapter shall not be operative within the limits of cities of the first class.

\[ [1961 c 14 § 81.54.040](https://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1961c14.pdf?cite=1961%20c%2014%20§%2081.54.040); [1953 c 95 § 16](https://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1953c95.pdf?cite=1953%20c%2095%20§%2016); [1951 c 111 § 2](https://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1951c111.pdf?cite=1951%20c%20111%20§%202); \]

