# 9A.88 - Indecent exposure—Prostitution.
* [9A.88.010 - Indecent exposure.](#9a88010---indecent-exposure)
* [9A.88.030 - Prostitution. (Effective until January 1, 2024.)](#9a88030---prostitution-effective-until-january-1-2024)
* [9A.88.040 - Prosecution for prostitution under RCW  9A.88.030—Affirmative defense.](#9a88040---prosecution-for-prostitution-under-rcw--9a88030affirmative-defense)
* [9A.88.050 - Prostitution—Sex of parties immaterial—No defense.](#9a88050---prostitutionsex-of-parties-immaterialno-defense)
* [9A.88.060 - Promoting prostitution—Definitions.](#9a88060---promoting-prostitutiondefinitions)
* [9A.88.070 - Promoting prostitution in the first degree.](#9a88070---promoting-prostitution-in-the-first-degree)
* [9A.88.080 - Promoting prostitution in the second degree.](#9a88080---promoting-prostitution-in-the-second-degree)
* [9A.88.085 - Promoting travel for prostitution.](#9a88085---promoting-travel-for-prostitution)
* [9A.88.090 - Permitting prostitution.](#9a88090---permitting-prostitution)
* [9A.88.110 - Patronizing a prostitute.](#9a88110---patronizing-a-prostitute)
* [9A.88.120 - Additional fee assessments.](#9a88120---additional-fee-assessments)
* [9A.88.130 - Additional requirements.](#9a88130---additional-requirements)
* [9A.88.140 - Vehicle impoundment—Fees—Fines.](#9a88140---vehicle-impoundmentfeesfines)
* [9A.88.150 - Seizure and forfeiture.](#9a88150---seizure-and-forfeiture)
* [9A.88.160 - Promoting prostitution in the first degree, second degree—Court appearance—No-contact orders—Entry of order into computer-based criminal intelligence information system.](#9a88160---promoting-prostitution-in-the-first-degree-second-degreecourt-appearanceno-contact-ordersentry-of-order-into-computer-based-criminal-intelligence-information-system)
* [9A.88.170 - Promoting prostitution in the first degree, second degree—Court may prohibit defendant's contact with victim—No-contact orders—Issuance, termination, modification—Entry of order into computer-based criminal intelligence information system.](#9a88170---promoting-prostitution-in-the-first-degree-second-degreecourt-may-prohibit-defendants-contact-with-victimno-contact-ordersissuance-termination-modificationentry-of-order-into-computer-based-criminal-intelligence-information-system)
* [9A.88.180 - Promoting prostitution in the first degree, second degree—Condition of sentence restricting contact—No-contact orders—Entry of order into computer-based criminal intelligence information system.](#9a88180---promoting-prostitution-in-the-first-degree-second-degreecondition-of-sentence-restricting-contactno-contact-ordersentry-of-order-into-computer-based-criminal-intelligence-information-system)
* [9A.88.190 - Enforcement of rules restricting contact.](#9a88190---enforcement-of-rules-restricting-contact)
* [9A.88.200 - Emergency assistance—Criminal immunity.](#9a88200---emergency-assistancecriminal-immunity)
## 9A.88.010 - Indecent exposure.
1. A person is guilty of indecent exposure if he or she intentionally makes any open and obscene exposure of his or her person or the person of another knowing that such conduct is likely to cause reasonable affront or alarm. The act of breastfeeding or expressing breast milk is not indecent exposure.

2. [Empty]

   a. Except as provided in (b) and (c) of this subsection, indecent exposure is a misdemeanor.

   b. Indecent exposure is a gross misdemeanor on the first offense if the person exposes himself or herself to a person under the age of fourteen years.

   c. Indecent exposure is a class C felony if the person has previously been convicted under this section or of a sex offense as defined in RCW 9.94A.030.

\[ [2003 c 53 § 92](https://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/2003-04/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/Senate/5758.SL.pdf?cite=2003%20c%2053%20§%2092); [2001 c 88 § 2](https://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/2001-02/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/House/1590-S2.SL.pdf?cite=2001%20c%2088%20§%202); [1990 c 3 § 904](https://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1990c3.pdf?cite=1990%20c%203%20§%20904); [1987 c 277 § 1](https://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1987c277.pdf?cite=1987%20c%20277%20§%201); [1975 1st ex.s. c 260 § 9A.88.010](https://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1975ex1c260.pdf?cite=1975%201st%20ex.s.%20c%20260%20§%209A.88.010); \]

## 9A.88.030 - Prostitution. (Effective until January 1, 2024.)
1. A person is guilty of prostitution if such person engages or agrees or offers to engage in sexual conduct with another person in return for a fee.

2. For purposes of this section, "sexual conduct" means "sexual intercourse" or "sexual contact," both as defined in chapter 9A.44 RCW.

3. Prostitution is a misdemeanor.

\[ [1988 c 145 § 16](https://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1988c145.pdf?cite=1988%20c%20145%20§%2016); [1979 ex.s. c 244 § 15](https://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1979ex1c244.pdf?cite=1979%20ex.s.%20c%20244%20§%2015); [1975 1st ex.s. c 260 § 9A.88.030](https://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1975ex1c260.pdf?cite=1975%201st%20ex.s.%20c%20260%20§%209A.88.030); \]

## 9A.88.040 - Prosecution for prostitution under RCW  9A.88.030—Affirmative defense.
In any prosecution for prostitution under RCW 9A.88.030, it is an affirmative defense that the actor committed the offense as a result of being a victim of trafficking, RCW 9A.40.100, promoting prostitution in the first degree, RCW 9A.88.070, or trafficking in persons under the trafficking victims protection act of 2000, 22 U.S.C. Sec. 7101 et seq. Documentation that the actor is named as a current victim in an information or the investigative records upon which a conviction is obtained for trafficking, promoting prostitution in the first degree, or trafficking in persons shall create a presumption that the person's participation in prostitution was a result of having been a victim of trafficking, promoting prostitution in the first degree, or trafficking in persons.

\[ [2012 c 142 § 1](https://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/2011-12/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/Senate/6255.SL.pdf?cite=2012%20c%20142%20§%201); \]

## 9A.88.050 - Prostitution—Sex of parties immaterial—No defense.
In any prosecution for prostitution, the sex of the two parties or prospective parties to the sexual conduct engaged in, contemplated, or solicited is immaterial, and it is no defense that:

1. Such persons were of the same sex; or

2. The person who received, agreed to receive, or solicited a fee was a male and the person who paid or agreed or offered to pay such fee was female.

\[ [1975 1st ex.s. c 260 § 9A.88.050](https://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1975ex1c260.pdf?cite=1975%201st%20ex.s.%20c%20260%20§%209A.88.050); \]

## 9A.88.060 - Promoting prostitution—Definitions.
The following definitions are applicable in RCW 9A.88.070 through 9A.88.090:

1. "Advances prostitution." A person "advances prostitution" if, acting other than as a prostitute or as a customer thereof, he or she causes or aids a person to commit or engage in prostitution, procures or solicits customers for prostitution, provides persons or premises for prostitution purposes, operates or assists in the operation of a house of prostitution or a prostitution enterprise, or engages in any other conduct designed to institute, aid, or facilitate an act or enterprise of prostitution.

2. "Profits from prostitution." A person "profits from prostitution" if, acting other than as a prostitute receiving compensation for personally rendered prostitution services, he or she accepts or receives money or anything of value pursuant to an agreement or understanding with any person whereby he or she participates or is to participate in the proceeds of prostitution activity.

\[ [2017 c 231 § 5](https://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/2017-18/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/Senate/5030.SL.pdf?cite=2017%20c%20231%20§%205); [2011 c 336 § 412](https://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/2011-12/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/Senate/5045.SL.pdf?cite=2011%20c%20336%20§%20412); [1975 1st ex.s. c 260 § 9A.88.060](https://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1975ex1c260.pdf?cite=1975%201st%20ex.s.%20c%20260%20§%209A.88.060); \]

## 9A.88.070 - Promoting prostitution in the first degree.
1. A person is guilty of promoting prostitution in the first degree if he or she knowingly advances prostitution:

   a. By compelling a person by threat or force to engage in prostitution or profits from prostitution which results from such threat or force; or

   b. By compelling a person with a mental incapacity or developmental disability that renders the person incapable of consent to engage in prostitution or profits from prostitution that results from such compulsion.

2. Promoting prostitution in the first degree is a class B felony.

\[ [2012 c 141 § 1](https://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/2011-12/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/Senate/6254.SL.pdf?cite=2012%20c%20141%20§%201); [2007 c 368 § 13](https://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/2007-08/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/Senate/5718-S.SL.pdf?cite=2007%20c%20368%20§%2013); [1975 1st ex.s. c 260 § 9A.88.070](https://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1975ex1c260.pdf?cite=1975%201st%20ex.s.%20c%20260%20§%209A.88.070); \]

## 9A.88.080 - Promoting prostitution in the second degree.
1. A person is guilty of promoting prostitution in the second degree if he or she knowingly:

   a. Profits from prostitution; or

   b. Advances prostitution.

2. Promoting prostitution in the second degree is a class C felony.

\[ [2011 c 336 § 413](https://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/2011-12/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/Senate/5045.SL.pdf?cite=2011%20c%20336%20§%20413); [1975 1st ex.s. c 260 § 9A.88.080](https://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1975ex1c260.pdf?cite=1975%201st%20ex.s.%20c%20260%20§%209A.88.080); \]

## 9A.88.085 - Promoting travel for prostitution.
1. A person commits the offense of promoting travel for prostitution if the person knowingly sells or offers to sell travel services that include or facilitate travel for the purpose of engaging in what would be patronizing a prostitute or promoting prostitution, if occurring in the state.

2. For purposes of this section, "travel services" has the same meaning as defined in RCW 19.138.021.

3. Promoting travel for prostitution is a class C felony.

\[ [2006 c 250 § 2](https://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/2005-06/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/Senate/6731.SL.pdf?cite=2006%20c%20250%20§%202); \]

## 9A.88.090 - Permitting prostitution.
1. A person is guilty of permitting prostitution if, having possession or control of premises which he or she knows are being used for prostitution purposes, he or she fails without lawful excuse to make reasonable effort to halt or abate such use.

2. Permitting prostitution is a misdemeanor.

\[ [2011 c 336 § 414](https://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/2011-12/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/Senate/5045.SL.pdf?cite=2011%20c%20336%20§%20414); [1975 1st ex.s. c 260 § 9A.88.090](https://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1975ex1c260.pdf?cite=1975%201st%20ex.s.%20c%20260%20§%209A.88.090); \]

## 9A.88.110 - Patronizing a prostitute.
1. A person is guilty of patronizing a prostitute if:

   a. Pursuant to a prior understanding, he or she pays a fee to another person as compensation for such person or a third person having engaged in sexual conduct with him or her; or

   b. He or she pays or agrees to pay a fee to another person pursuant to an understanding that in return therefor such person will engage in sexual conduct with him or her; or

   c. He or she solicits or requests another person to engage in sexual conduct with him or her in return for a fee.

2. The crime of patronizing a prostitute may be committed in more than one location. The crime is deemed to have been committed in any location in which the defendant commits any act under subsection (1)(a), (b), or (c) of this section that constitutes part of the crime. A person who sends a communication to patronize a prostitute is considered to have committed the crime both at the place from which the contact was made pursuant to subsection (1)(a), (b), or (c) of this section and where the communication is received, provided that this section must be construed to prohibit anyone from being prosecuted twice for substantially the same crime.

3. For purposes of this section, "sexual conduct" has the meaning given in RCW 9A.88.030.

4. Patronizing a prostitute is a misdemeanor.

\[ [2017 c 232 § 1](https://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/2017-18/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/House/1184-S.SL.pdf?cite=2017%20c%20232%20§%201); [1988 c 146 § 4](https://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1988c146.pdf?cite=1988%20c%20146%20§%204); \]

## 9A.88.120 - Additional fee assessments.
1. [Empty]

   a. In addition to penalties set forth in RCW 9A.88.010 and 9A.88.030, an adult offender who is either convicted or given a deferred sentence or a deferred prosecution or who has entered into a statutory or nonstatutory diversion agreement as a result of an arrest for violating RCW 9A.88.010, 9A.88.030, or comparable county or municipal ordinances shall be assessed a fifty dollar fee.

   b. In addition to penalties set forth in RCW 9A.88.090, an adult offender who is either convicted or given a deferred sentence or a deferred prosecution or who has entered into a statutory or nonstatutory diversion agreement as a result of an arrest for violating RCW 9A.88.090 or comparable county or municipal ordinances shall be assessed a fee in the amount of:

      i. One thousand five hundred dollars if the defendant has no prior convictions, deferred sentences, deferred prosecutions, or statutory or nonstatutory diversion agreements for this offense;

      ii. Two thousand five hundred dollars if the defendant has one prior conviction, deferred sentence, deferred prosecution, or statutory or nonstatutory diversion agreement for this offense; and

      iii. Five thousand dollars if the defendant has two or more prior convictions, deferred sentences, deferred prosecutions, or statutory or nonstatutory diversion agreements for this offense.

   c. In addition to penalties set forth in RCW 9A.88.110, a person who is either convicted or given a deferred sentence or a deferred prosecution or who has entered into a statutory or nonstatutory diversion agreement as a result of an arrest for violating RCW 9A.88.110 or a comparable county or municipal ordinance shall be assessed a fee in the amount of:

      i. One thousand five hundred dollars if the defendant has no prior convictions, deferred sentences, deferred prosecutions, or statutory or nonstatutory diversion agreements for this offense;

      ii. Two thousand five hundred dollars if the defendant has one prior conviction, deferred sentence, deferred prosecution, or statutory or nonstatutory diversion agreement for this offense; and

      iii. Five thousand dollars if the defendant has two or more prior convictions, deferred sentences, deferred prosecutions, or statutory or nonstatutory diversion agreements for this offense.

   d. In addition to penalties set forth in RCW 9A.88.070 and 9A.88.080, a person who is either convicted or given a deferred sentence or a deferred prosecution or who has entered into a statutory or nonstatutory diversion agreement as a result of an arrest for violating RCW 9A.88.070, 9A.88.080, or comparable county or municipal ordinances shall be assessed a fee in the amount of:

      i. Three thousand dollars if the defendant has no prior convictions, deferred sentences, deferred prosecutions, or statutory or nonstatutory diversion agreements for this offense;

      ii. Six thousand dollars if the defendant has one prior conviction, deferred sentence, deferred prosecution, or statutory or nonstatutory diversion agreement for this offense; and

      iii. Ten thousand dollars if the defendant has two or more prior convictions, deferred sentences, deferred prosecutions, or statutory or nonstatutory diversion agreements for this offense.

2. The court shall not reduce, waive, or suspend payment of all or part of the assessed fee in this section unless it finds, on the record, that the offender does not have the ability to pay the fee in which case it may reduce the fee by an amount up to two-thirds of the maximum allowable fee.

   a. A superior court may, as described in RCW 9.94A.760, set a sum that the offender is required to pay on a monthly basis towards satisfying the fee imposed in this section.

   b. A district or municipal court may enter into a payment plan with the defendant, in which the fee assessed in this section is paid through scheduled periodic payments. The court may assess the defendant a reasonable fee for administrative services related to the operation of the payment plan.

3. Fees assessed under this section shall be collected by the clerk of the court and remitted to the treasurer of the county where the offense occurred for deposit in the county general fund, except in cases in which the offense occurred in a city or town that provides for its own law enforcement, in which case these amounts shall be remitted to the treasurer of the city or town for deposit in the general fund of the city or town. Revenue from the fees must be used for local efforts to reduce the commercial sale of sex including, but not limited to, increasing enforcement of commercial sex laws.

   a. At least fifty percent of the revenue from fees imposed under this section must be spent on prevention, including education programs for offenders, such as john school, and rehabilitative services for victims, such as mental health and substance abuse counseling, parenting skills, training, housing relief, education, vocational training, drop-in centers, and employment counseling.

   b. Two percent of the revenue from fees imposed under this section shall be remitted quarterly to the department of commerce, together with a report detailing the fees assessed, the revenue received, and how that revenue was spent.

   c. Revenues from these fees are not subject to the distribution requirements under RCW 3.50.100, 3.62.020, 3.62.040, 10.82.070, or 35.20.220.

4. For the purposes of this section:

   a. "Statutory or nonstatutory diversion agreement" means an agreement under RCW 13.40.080 or any written agreement between a person accused of an offense listed in subsection (1) of this section and a court, county, or city prosecutor, or designee thereof, whereby the person agrees to fulfill certain conditions in lieu of prosecution.

   b. "Deferred sentence" means a sentence that will not be carried out if the defendant meets certain requirements, such as complying with the conditions of probation.

\[ [2015 c 265 § 20](https://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/2015-16/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/Senate/5564-S2.SL.pdf?cite=2015%20c%20265%20§%2020); [2013 c 121 § 5](https://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/2013-14/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/House/1291-S.SL.pdf?cite=2013%20c%20121%20§%205); [2012 c 134 § 3](https://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/2011-12/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/House/1983-S.SL.pdf?cite=2012%20c%20134%20§%203); [2007 c 368 § 12](https://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/2007-08/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/Senate/5718-S.SL.pdf?cite=2007%20c%20368%20§%2012); [1995 c 353 § 13](https://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/1995-96/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/House/1387-S.SL.pdf?cite=1995%20c%20353%20§%2013); \]

## 9A.88.130 - Additional requirements.
1. When sentencing or imposing conditions on a person convicted of, or receiving a deferred sentence or deferred prosecution for, violating RCW 9A.88.110 or 9.68A.100, the court must impose a requirement that the offender:

   a. Not be subsequently arrested for patronizing a prostitute or commercial sexual abuse of a minor;

   b. Remain outside the geographical area, prescribed by the court, in which the person was arrested for violating RCW 9A.88.110 or 9.68A.100, unless such a requirement would interfere with the person's legitimate employment or residence or otherwise be infeasible; and

   c. Fulfill the terms of a program, if a first-time offender, designated by the sentencing court, designed to educate offenders about the negative costs of prostitution.

2. This requirement is in addition to the penalties set forth in RCW 9A.88.110, 9A.88.120, and 9.68A.100.

\[ [2012 c 136 § 2](https://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/2011-12/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/House/2692-S.SL.pdf?cite=2012%20c%20136%20§%202); [1999 c 327 § 2](https://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/1999-00/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/House/1131-S.SL.pdf?cite=1999%20c%20327%20§%202); \]

## 9A.88.140 - Vehicle impoundment—Fees—Fines.
1. [Empty]

   a. Upon an arrest for a suspected violation of patronizing a prostitute, promoting prostitution in the first degree, promoting prostitution in the second degree, promoting travel for prostitution, the arresting law enforcement officer may impound the person's vehicle if (i) the motor vehicle was used in the commission of the crime; (ii) the person arrested is the owner of the vehicle or the vehicle is a rental car as defined in RCW 46.04.465; and (iii) either (A) the person arrested has previously been convicted of one of the offenses listed in this subsection or (B) the offense was committed within an area designated under (b) of this subsection.

   b. A local governing authority may designate areas within which vehicles are subject to impoundment under this section regardless of whether the person arrested has previously been convicted of any of the offenses listed in (a) of this subsection.

      i. The designation must be based on evidence indicating that the area has a disproportionately higher number of arrests for the offenses listed in (a) of this subsection as compared to other areas within the same jurisdiction.

      ii. The local governing authority shall post signs at the boundaries of the designated area to indicate that the area has been designated under this subsection.

2. Upon an arrest for a suspected violation of commercial sexual abuse of a minor, promoting commercial sexual abuse of a minor, or promoting travel for commercial sexual abuse of a minor, the arresting law enforcement officer shall impound the person's vehicle if (a) the motor vehicle was used in the commission of the crime; and (b) the person arrested is the owner of the vehicle or the vehicle is a rental car as defined in RCW 46.04.465.

3. Impoundments performed under this section shall be in accordance with chapter 46.55 RCW and the impoundment order must clearly state "prostitution hold."

4. [Empty]

   a. Prior to redeeming the impounded vehicle, and in addition to all applicable impoundment, towing, and storage fees paid to the towing company under chapter 46.55 RCW, an adult owner of an impounded vehicle must pay a fine to the impounding agency. The fine shall be five hundred dollars for the offenses specified in subsection (1) of this section, or two thousand five hundred dollars for the offenses specified in subsection (2) of this section.

   b. Upon receipt of the fine paid under (a) of this subsection, the impounding agency shall issue a written receipt to the owner of the impounded vehicle.

   c. Fines assessed under this section shall be collected by the clerk of the court and remitted to the treasurer of the county where the offense occurred for deposit in the county general fund, except in cases in which the offense occurred in a city or town that provides for its own law enforcement, in which case these amounts shall be remitted to the treasurer of the city or town for deposit in the general fund of the city or town. Revenue from the fines must be used for local efforts to reduce the commercial sale of sex including, but not limited to, increasing enforcement of commercial sex laws.

      i. At least fifty percent of the revenue from fines imposed under this section must be spent on prevention, including education programs for offenders, such as john school, and rehabilitative services for victims, such as mental health and substance abuse counseling, parenting skills, training, housing relief, education, vocational training, drop-in centers, and employment counseling.

      ii. Two percent of the revenue from fines imposed under this section shall be remitted quarterly to the department of commerce, together with a report detailing the fees assessed, the revenue received, and how that revenue was spent.

      iii. Revenues from these fees are not subject to the distribution requirements under RCW 3.50.100, 3.62.020, 3.62.040, 10.82.070, or 35.20.220.

5. [Empty]

   a. In order to redeem a vehicle impounded under this section, the owner must provide the towing company with the written receipt issued under subsection (4)(b) of this section.

   b. The written receipt issued under subsection (4)(b) of this section authorizes the towing company to release the impounded vehicle upon payment of all impoundment, towing, and storage fees.

   c. A towing company that relies on a forged receipt to release a vehicle impounded under this section is not liable to the impounding authority for any unpaid fine under subsection (4)(a) of this section.

6. [Empty]

   a. In any proceeding under chapter 46.55 RCW to contest the validity of an impoundment under this section where the claimant substantially prevails, the claimant is entitled to a full refund of the impoundment, towing, and storage fees paid under chapter 46.55 RCW and the five hundred dollar fine paid under subsection (4) of this section.

   b. If the person is found not guilty at trial for a crime listed under subsection (1) of this section, the person is entitled to a full refund of the impoundment, towing, and storage fees paid under chapter 46.55 RCW and the fine paid under subsection (4) of this section.

   c. All refunds made under this section shall be paid by the impounding agency.

   d. Prior to receiving any refund under this section, the claimant must provide proof of payment.

\[ [2015 c 265 § 21](https://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/2015-16/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/Senate/5564-S2.SL.pdf?cite=2015%20c%20265%20§%2021); [2013 c 121 § 6](https://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/2013-14/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/House/1291-S.SL.pdf?cite=2013%20c%20121%20§%206); [2010 c 289 § 12](https://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/2009-10/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/Senate/6476-S.SL.pdf?cite=2010%20c%20289%20§%2012); [2009 c 387 § 1](https://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/2009-10/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/House/1362-S.SL.pdf?cite=2009%20c%20387%20§%201); [2007 c 368 § 8](https://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/2007-08/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/Senate/5718-S.SL.pdf?cite=2007%20c%20368%20§%208); [1999 c 327 § 3](https://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/1999-00/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/House/1131-S.SL.pdf?cite=1999%20c%20327%20§%203); \]

## 9A.88.150 - Seizure and forfeiture.
1. The following are subject to seizure and forfeiture and no property right exists in them:

   a. Any property or other interest acquired or maintained in violation of RCW 9.68A.100, 9.68A.101, or 9A.88.070 to the extent of the investment of funds, and any appreciation or income attributable to the investment, from a violation of RCW 9.68A.100, 9.68A.101, or 9A.88.070;

   b. All conveyances, including aircraft, vehicles, or vessels, which are used, or intended for use, in any manner to facilitate a violation of RCW 9.68A.100, 9.68A.101, or 9A.88.070, except that:

      i. No conveyance used by any person as a common carrier in the transaction of business as a common carrier is subject to forfeiture under this section unless it appears that the owner or other person in charge of the conveyance is a consenting party or privy to a violation of RCW 9.68A.100, 9.68A.101, or 9A.88.070;

      ii. No conveyance is subject to forfeiture under this section by reason of any act or omission established by the owner thereof to have been committed or omitted without the owner's knowledge or consent;

      iii. A forfeiture of a conveyance encumbered by a bona fide security interest is subject to the interest of the secured party if the secured party neither had knowledge of nor consented to the act or omission; and

      iv. When the owner of a conveyance has been arrested for a violation of RCW 9.68A.100, 9.68A.101, or 9A.88.070, the conveyance in which the person is arrested may not be subject to forfeiture unless it is seized or process is issued for its seizure within ten days of the owner's arrest;

   c. Any property, contractual right, or claim against property used to influence any enterprise that a person has established, operated, controlled, conducted, or participated in the conduct of, in violation of RCW 9.68A.100, 9.68A.101, or 9A.88.070;

   d. All proceeds traceable to or derived from an offense defined in RCW 9.68A.100, 9.68A.101, or 9A.88.070 and all moneys, negotiable instruments, securities, and other things of value significantly used or intended to be used significantly to facilitate commission of the offense;

   e. All books, records, and research products and materials, including formulas, microfilm, tapes, and data which are used, or intended for use, in violation of RCW 9.68A.100, 9.68A.101, or 9A.88.070;

   f. All moneys, negotiable instruments, securities, or other tangible or intangible property of value furnished or intended to be furnished by any person in exchange for a violation of RCW 9.68A.100, 9.68A.101, or 9A.88.070, all tangible or intangible personal property, proceeds, or assets acquired in whole or in part with proceeds traceable to an exchange or series of exchanges in violation of RCW 9.68A.100, 9.68A.101, or 9A.88.070, and all moneys, negotiable instruments, and securities used or intended to be used to facilitate any violation of RCW 9.68A.100, 9.68A.101, or 9A.88.070. A forfeiture of money, negotiable instruments, securities, or other tangible or intangible property encumbered by a bona fide security interest is subject to the interest of the secured party if, at the time the security interest was created, the secured party neither had knowledge of nor consented to the act or omission. No personal property may be forfeited under this subsection (1)(f), to the extent of the interest of an owner, by reason of any act or omission, which that owner establishes was committed or omitted without the owner's knowledge or consent; and

   g. All real property, including any right, title, and interest in the whole of any lot or tract of land, and any appurtenances or improvements which are being used with the knowledge of the owner for a violation of RCW 9.68A.100, 9.68A.101, or 9A.88.070, or which have been acquired in whole or in part with proceeds traceable to an exchange or series of exchanges in violation of RCW 9.68A.100, 9.68A.101, or 9A.88.070, if a substantial nexus exists between the violation and the real property. However:

      i. No property may be forfeited pursuant to this subsection (1)(g), to the extent of the interest of an owner, by reason of any act or omission committed or omitted without the owner's knowledge or consent;

      ii. A forfeiture of real property encumbered by a bona fide security interest is subject to the interest of the secured party if the secured party, at the time the security interest was created, neither had knowledge of nor consented to the act or omission.

2. Real or personal property subject to forfeiture under this section may be seized by any law enforcement officer of this state upon process issued by any superior court having jurisdiction over the property. Seizure of real property shall include the filing of a lis pendens by the seizing agency. Real property seized under this section shall not be transferred or otherwise conveyed until ninety days after seizure or until a judgment of forfeiture is entered, whichever is later: PROVIDED, That real property seized under this section may be transferred or conveyed to any person or entity who acquires title by foreclosure or deed in lieu of foreclosure of a security interest. Seizure of personal property without process may be made if:

   a. The seizure is incident to an arrest or a search under a search warrant;

   b. The property subject to seizure has been the subject of a prior judgment in favor of the state in a criminal injunction or forfeiture proceeding; or

   c. The law enforcement officer has probable cause to believe that the property was used or is intended to be used in violation of RCW 9.68A.100, 9.68A.101, or 9A.88.070.

3. In the event of seizure pursuant to subsection (2) of this section, proceedings for forfeiture shall be deemed commenced by the seizure. The law enforcement agency under whose authority the seizure was made shall cause notice to be served within fifteen days following the seizure on the owner of the property seized and the person in charge thereof and any person having any known right or interest therein, including any community property interest, of the seizure and intended forfeiture of the seized property. Service of notice of seizure of real property shall be made according to the rules of civil procedure. However, the state may not obtain a default judgment with respect to real property against a party who is served by substituted service absent an affidavit stating that a good faith effort has been made to ascertain if the defaulted party is incarcerated within the state, and that there is no present basis to believe that the party is incarcerated within the state. Notice of seizure in the case of property subject to a security interest that has been perfected by filing a financing statement, or a certificate of title, shall be made by service upon the secured party or the secured party's assignee at the address shown on the financing statement or the certificate of title. The notice of seizure in other cases may be served by any method authorized by law or court rule including, but not limited to, service by certified mail with return receipt requested. Service by mail shall be deemed complete upon mailing within the fifteen day period following the seizure.

4. If no person notifies the seizing law enforcement agency in writing of the person's claim of ownership or right to possession of items specified in subsection (1) of this section within forty-five days of the service of notice from the seizing agency in the case of personal property and ninety days in the case of real property, the item seized shall be deemed forfeited. The community property interest in real property of a person whose spouse or domestic partner committed a violation giving rise to seizure of the real property may not be forfeited if the person did not participate in the violation.

5. If any person notifies the seizing law enforcement agency in writing of the person's claim of ownership or right to possession of items specified in subsection (1) of this section within forty-five days of the service of notice from the seizing agency in the case of personal property and ninety days in the case of real property, the person or persons shall be afforded a reasonable opportunity to be heard as to the claim or right. The notice of claim may be served by any method authorized by law or court rule including, but not limited to, service by first-class mail. Service by mail shall be deemed complete upon mailing within the forty-five day period following service of the notice of seizure in the case of personal property and within the ninety day period following service of the notice of seizure in the case of real property. The hearing shall be before the chief law enforcement officer of the seizing agency or the chief law enforcement officer's designee, except where the seizing agency is a state agency as defined in RCW 34.12.020(4), the hearing shall be before the chief law enforcement officer of the seizing agency or an administrative law judge appointed under chapter 34.12 RCW, except that any person asserting a claim or right may remove the matter to a court of competent jurisdiction. Removal of any matter involving personal property may only be accomplished according to the rules of civil procedure. The person seeking removal of the matter must serve process against the state, county, political subdivision, or municipality that operates the seizing agency, and any other party of interest, in accordance with RCW 4.28.080 or 4.92.020, within forty-five days after the person seeking removal has notified the seizing law enforcement agency of the person's claim of ownership or right to possession. The court to which the matter is to be removed shall be the district court when the aggregate value of personal property is within the jurisdictional limit set forth in RCW 3.66.020. A hearing before the seizing agency and any appeal therefrom shall be under Title 34 RCW. In all cases, the burden of proof is upon the law enforcement agency to establish, by a preponderance of the evidence, that the property is subject to forfeiture.

The seizing law enforcement agency shall promptly return the article or articles to the claimant upon a determination by the administrative law judge or court that the claimant is the present lawful owner or is lawfully entitled to possession thereof of items specified in subsection (1) of this section.

6. In any proceeding to forfeit property under this title, where the claimant substantially prevails, the claimant is entitled to reasonable attorneys' fees reasonably incurred by the claimant. In addition, in a court hearing between two or more claimants to the article or articles involved, the prevailing party is entitled to a judgment for costs and reasonable attorneys' fees.

7. When property is forfeited under this chapter, the seizing law enforcement agency may:

   a. Retain it for official use or upon application by any law enforcement agency of this state release the property to that agency for the exclusive use of enforcing this chapter or chapter 9.68A RCW;

   b. Sell that which is not required to be destroyed by law and which is not harmful to the public; or

   c. Request the appropriate sheriff or director of public safety to take custody of the property and remove it for disposition in accordance with law.

8. [Empty]

   a. When property is forfeited, the seizing agency shall keep a record indicating the identity of the prior owner, if known, a description of the property, the disposition of the property, the value of the property at the time of seizure, and the amount of proceeds realized from disposition of the property.

   b. Each seizing agency shall retain records of forfeited property for at least seven years.

   c. Each seizing agency shall file a report including a copy of the records of forfeited property with the state treasurer each calendar quarter.

   d. The quarterly report need not include a record of forfeited property that is still being held for use as evidence during the investigation or prosecution of a case or during the appeal from a conviction.

9. [Empty]

   a. By January 31st of each year, each seizing agency shall remit to the state an amount equal to ten percent of the net proceeds of any property forfeited during the preceding calendar year. Money remitted shall be deposited in the prostitution prevention and intervention account under RCW 43.63A.740.

   b. The net proceeds of forfeited property is the value of the forfeitable interest in the property after deducting the cost of satisfying any bona fide security interest to which the property is subject at the time of seizure; and in the case of sold property, after deducting the cost of sale, including reasonable fees or commissions paid to independent selling agents, and the cost of any valid landlord's claim for damages under subsection (12) of this section.

   c. The value of sold forfeited property is the sale price. The value of destroyed property and retained firearms or illegal property is zero.

10. Net proceeds not required to be remitted to the state shall be used for payment of all proper expenses of the investigation leading to the seizure, including any money delivered to the subject of the investigation by the law enforcement agency, and of the proceedings for forfeiture and sale, including expenses of seizure, maintenance of custody, advertising, actual costs of the prosecuting or city attorney, and court costs. Money remaining after payment of these expenses shall be retained by the seizing law enforcement agency for the exclusive use of enforcing the provisions of this chapter or chapter 9.68A RCW.

11. Upon the entry of an order of forfeiture of real property, the court shall forward a copy of the order to the assessor of the county in which the property is located. Orders for the forfeiture of real property shall be entered by the superior court, subject to court rules. Such an order shall be filed by the seizing agency in the county auditor's records in the county in which the real property is located.

12. A landlord may assert a claim against proceeds from the sale of assets seized and forfeited under subsection (9) of this section, only if:

    a. A law enforcement officer, while acting in his or her official capacity, directly caused damage to the complaining landlord's property while executing a search of a tenant's residence;

    b. The landlord has applied any funds remaining in the tenant's deposit, to which the landlord has a right under chapter 59.18 RCW, to cover the damage directly caused by a law enforcement officer prior to asserting a claim under the provisions of this section:

       i. Only if the funds applied under (b) of this subsection are insufficient to satisfy the damage directly caused by a law enforcement officer, may the landlord seek compensation for the damage by filing a claim against the governmental entity under whose authority the law enforcement agency operates within thirty days after the search;

       ii. Only if the governmental entity denies or fails to respond to the landlord's claim within sixty days of the date of filing, may the landlord collect damages under this subsection by filing within thirty days of denial or the expiration of the sixty day period, whichever occurs first, a claim with the seizing law enforcement agency. The seizing law enforcement agency must notify the landlord of the status of the claim by the end of the thirty day period. Nothing in this section requires the claim to be paid by the end of the sixty day or thirty day period; and

    c. For any claim filed under (b) of this subsection, the law enforcement agency shall pay the claim unless the agency provides substantial proof that the landlord either:

       i. Knew or consented to actions of the tenant in violation of RCW 9.68A.100, 9.68A.101, or 9A.88.070; or

       ii. Failed to respond to a notification of the illegal activity, provided by a law enforcement agency under RCW 59.18.075, within seven days of receipt of notification of the illegal activity.

13. The landlord's claim for damages under subsection (12) of this section may not include a claim for loss of business and is limited to:

    a. Damage to tangible property and clean-up costs;

    b. The lesser of the cost of repair or fair market value of the damage directly caused by a law enforcement officer;

    c. The proceeds from the sale of the specific tenant's property seized and forfeited under subsection (9) of this section; and

    d. The proceeds available after the seizing law enforcement agency satisfies any bona fide security interest in the tenant's property and costs related to sale of the tenant's property as provided by subsection (12) of this section.

14. Subsections (12) and (13) of this section do not limit any other rights a landlord may have against a tenant to collect for damages. However, if a law enforcement agency satisfies a landlord's claim under subsection (12) of this section, the rights the landlord has against the tenant for damages directly caused by a law enforcement officer under the terms of the landlord and tenant's contract are subrogated to the law enforcement agency.

\[ [2022 c 162 § 5](https://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/2021-22/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/Senate/5728-S.SL.pdf?cite=2022%20c%20162%20§%205); [2014 c 188 § 4](https://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/2013-14/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/House/1791-S.SL.pdf?cite=2014%20c%20188%20§%204); [2012 c 140 § 1](https://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/2011-12/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/Senate/6253-S.SL.pdf?cite=2012%20c%20140%20§%201); \]

## 9A.88.160 - Promoting prostitution in the first degree, second degree—Court appearance—No-contact orders—Entry of order into computer-based criminal intelligence information system.
1. A defendant who is charged by citation, complaint, or information with an offense involving promoting prostitution in the first degree as described in RCW 9A.88.070 or promoting prostitution in the second degree as described in RCW 9A.88.080 and not arrested shall appear in court for arraignment or initial appearance in person as soon as practicable, but in no event later than fourteen days after the defendant is served with the citation, complaint, or information. At that appearance, the court shall determine the necessity of imposing or extending a no-contact order, and consider the provisions of RCW 9.41.800 or other conditions of pretrial release according to the procedures established by court rule for preliminary appearance or an arraignment.

2. Whenever a no-contact order is issued under this section, the clerk of the court shall forward a copy of the order on or before the next judicial day to the appropriate law enforcement agency specified in the order. Upon receipt of the copy of the order, the law enforcement agency shall enter the order for one year or until the expiration date specified on the order into any computer-based criminal intelligence information system available in this state used by law enforcement agencies to list outstanding warrants. Entry into the computer-based criminal intelligence information system constitutes notice to all law enforcement agencies of the existence of the order. The order is fully enforceable in any jurisdiction in the state. Upon receipt of notice that an order has been terminated, the law enforcement agency shall remove the order from the computer-based criminal intelligence information system.

\[ [2017 c 230 § 5](https://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/2017-18/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/House/1079-S.SL.pdf?cite=2017%20c%20230%20§%205); \]

## 9A.88.170 - Promoting prostitution in the first degree, second degree—Court may prohibit defendant's contact with victim—No-contact orders—Issuance, termination, modification—Entry of order into computer-based criminal intelligence information system.
1. Because of the likelihood of repeated harassment and intimidation directed at those who have been victims of promoting prostitution in the first degree under RCW 9A.88.070 or promoting prostitution in the second degree under RCW 9A.88.080, before any defendant charged with or arrested, for a crime involving promoting prostitution is released from custody, or at any time the case remains unresolved, the court may prohibit that person from having any contact with the victim whether directly or through third parties. If there is no outstanding restraining or protective order prohibiting that person from having contact with the victim, the court may issue, by telephone, a no-contact order prohibiting the person charged or arrested from having contact with the victim or from knowingly coming within, or knowingly remaining within, a specified distance of a location. The court may also consider the provisions of RCW 9.41.800 or other conditions of pretrial release according to the procedures established by court rule for preliminary appearance or an arraignment.

2. At the time of arraignment, the court shall determine whether a no-contact order shall be issued or extended. So long as the court finds probable cause, the court may issue or extend a no-contact order. The no-contact order shall terminate if the defendant is acquitted or the charges are dismissed.

3. [Empty]

   a. Willful violation of a court order issued under this section is punishable under RCW 7.105.450.

   b. The written order shall contain the court's directives and shall bear the legend: Violation of this order is a criminal offense under chapter 7.105 RCW and the violator is subject to arrest; any assault, drive-by shooting, or reckless endangerment that is a violation of this order is a felony.

4. Upon a motion with notice to all parties and after a hearing, the court may terminate or modify the terms of an existing no-contact order, including terms entered pursuant to RCW 9.41.800 related to firearms or other dangerous weapons or to concealed pistol licenses.

5. [Empty]

   a. A defendant's motion to terminate or modify a no-contact order must include a declaration setting forth facts supporting the requested order for termination or modification. The court shall deny the motion unless it finds that adequate cause for hearing the motion is established by the declarations. If the court finds that the defendant established adequate cause, the court shall set a date for hearing the defendant's motion.

   b. The court may terminate or modify the terms of a no-contact order, including terms entered pursuant to RCW 9.41.800 related to firearms or other dangerous weapons or to concealed pistol licenses, if the defendant proves by a preponderance of the evidence that there has been a material change in circumstances such that the defendant is not likely to engage in or attempt to engage in physical or nonphysical contact with the victim if the order is terminated or modified. The victim bears no burden of proving that he or she has a current reasonable fear of harm by the defendant.

   c. A defendant may file a motion to terminate or modify pursuant to this section no more than once in every twelve-month period that the order is in effect, starting from the date of the order and continuing through any renewal.

6. Whenever a no-contact order is issued, modified, or terminated under this section, the clerk of the court shall forward a copy of the order on or before the next judicial day to the appropriate law enforcement agency specified in the order. Upon receipt of the copy of the order the law enforcement agency shall enter the order for one year or until the expiration date specified on the order into any computer-based criminal intelligence information system available in this state used by law enforcement agencies to list outstanding warrants. Entry into the computer-based criminal intelligence information system constitutes notice to all law enforcement agencies of the existence of the order. The order is fully enforceable in any jurisdiction in the state. Upon receipt of notice that an order has been terminated, the law enforcement agency shall remove the order from the computer-based criminal intelligence information system.

\[ [2021 c 215 § 112](https://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/2021-22/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/House/1320-S2.SL.pdf?cite=2021%20c%20215%20§%20112); [2017 c 230 § 7](https://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/2017-18/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/House/1079-S.SL.pdf?cite=2017%20c%20230%20§%207); \]

## 9A.88.180 - Promoting prostitution in the first degree, second degree—Condition of sentence restricting contact—No-contact orders—Entry of order into computer-based criminal intelligence information system.
1. If a defendant is found guilty of the crime of promoting prostitution in the first degree under RCW 9A.88.070 or promoting prostitution in the second degree under RCW 9A.88.080, and a condition of the sentence restricts the defendant's ability to have contact with the victim or witnesses, the condition must be recorded and a written certified copy of that order must be provided to the victim or witnesses by the clerk of the court. Willful violation of a court order issued under this section is punishable under RCW 7.105.450. The written order must contain the court's directives and shall bear the legend: Violation of this order is a criminal offense under chapter 7.105 RCW and the violator is subject to arrest; any assault, drive-by shooting, or reckless endangerment that is a violation of this order is a felony.

2. Whenever a no-contact order is issued under this section, the clerk of the court shall forward a copy of the order on or before the next judicial day to the appropriate law enforcement agency specified in the order. Upon receipt of the copy of the order, the law enforcement agency shall enter the order for one year or until the expiration date specified on the order into any computer-based criminal intelligence information system available in this state used by law enforcement agencies to list outstanding warrants. Entry into the computer-based criminal intelligence information system constitutes notice to all law enforcement agencies of the existence of the order. The order is fully enforceable in any jurisdiction in the state. Upon receipt of notice that an order has been terminated, the law enforcement agency shall remove the order from the computer-based criminal intelligence information system.

\[ [2021 c 215 § 113](https://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/2021-22/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/House/1320-S2.SL.pdf?cite=2021%20c%20215%20§%20113); [2017 c 230 § 8](https://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/2017-18/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/House/1079-S.SL.pdf?cite=2017%20c%20230%20§%208); \]

## 9A.88.190 - Enforcement of rules restricting contact.
Any general authority Washington peace officer as defined in RCW 10.93.020 in this state may enforce this chapter as it relates to orders restricting the defendants' ability to have contact with the victim or others.

\[ [2017 c 230 § 6](https://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/2017-18/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/House/1079-S.SL.pdf?cite=2017%20c%20230%20§%206); \]

## 9A.88.200 - Emergency assistance—Criminal immunity.
1. A person acting in good faith who seeks emergency assistance for a victim of an offense included in subsection (4) of this section may not be charged or prosecuted for prostitution under RCW 9A.88.030, or an equivalent municipal ordinance, if the evidence for the charge of prostitution was obtained as a result of the person seeking emergency assistance.

2. A person who is a victim of an offense included in subsection (4) of this section and is seeking emergency assistance on account of the offense may not be charged or prosecuted for prostitution under RCW 9A.88.030, or an equivalent municipal ordinance, if the evidence for the charge of prostitution was obtained as a result of the need for emergency assistance.

3. The protection in this section from prosecution for prostitution is not grounds for suppression of evidence in other criminal charges.

4. A victim of one of the following offenses, or a person seeking emergency assistance on his or her behalf, qualifies for immunity from prostitution charges as provided in subsections (1) and (2) of this section:

   a. Any violent offense as defined in RCW 9.94A.030;

   b. Assault in the third degree under RCW 9A.36.031;

   c. Assault in the fourth degree under RCW 9A.36.041, or an equivalent municipal ordinance;

   d. Rape in the third degree under RCW 9A.44.060.

\[ [2019 c 114 § 1](https://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/2019-20/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/House/1382.SL.pdf?cite=2019%20c%20114%20§%201); \]

