[wa-law.org](/) > [bill](/bill/) > [2023-24](/bill/2023-24/) > [HB 2341](/bill/2023-24/hb/2341/) > [Original Bill](/bill/2023-24/hb/2341/1/)

# HB 2341 - Offshore wind dev. study

[Source](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/2023-24/Pdf/Bills/House%20Bills/2341.pdf)

## Section 1
1. Washington state, along with much of the United States and many parts of the world, is experiencing an extraordinary transformation as it reduces the amount of electricity generated by fossil fuels and increases the amount of electricity generated by renewable resources such as wind and solar. Though the global transition away from electricity generated by fossil fuels may be a relatively recent one, Washington state has long been a leader in carbon-free electricity generation, thanks to the mighty power of the Columbia river. The hydroelectric generating capacity of the Columbia river dam system has produced carbon-free electricity to power tens of millions of homes in Washington, the Pacific Northwest, and the nation for nearly a century.

2. Unfortunately, the blessings of the Columbia river's hydroelectric generating capacity have come at a price. The dams that produce that electricity have also blocked thousands of miles of salmon habitat, with the result that 10 population groups of salmon that utilize or transit through the Columbia river system are now listed as threatened or endangered under the federal endangered species act, and many billions of dollars have been spent on salmon recovery efforts. As one particularly acute example of this trade-off, the power produced by the Dalles dam on the lower Columbia river comes as a result of submerging Celilo Falls, which for thousands of years was one of the most productive and culturally significant salmon harvesting locations along the Columbia river. It is fair to ask whether, knowing what we know now, we would have made the same choices a century ago to trade the health of our salmon runs for low-cost hydroelectricity.

3. Washington state faces a similar question as we contemplate the development of offshore wind generating facilities along the Pacific Coast of Washington, Oregon, and California. The eastern Pacific Ocean is one of the richest, most productive marine ecosystems in the world. The fisheries supported by these ecosystems feed the world and in doing so they support Washington fishers and their families from Ilwaco to Neah Bay to Anacortes. It would be a grave mistake to sacrifice the health and productivity of the Pacific Ocean marine ecosystem on the altar of carbon-free electrons.

4. Many questions remain concerning the effect of offshore wind turbines on oceanographic processes. Wind turbines can reduce the amount of energy in the wind, which can then create a lower energy wake behind the wind turbine facility. This reduction of the energy in wind can cause lower energy waves, with the result that there is much less mixing in the ocean surface layer. This, in turn, depletes the oxygen level in the water, which then reduces the amount of foundational food sources like zooplankton.

5. Although the potential risks of offshore wind generation may be clear, little is known about the magnitude or likelihood of that risk. Where so much depends on a healthy Pacific Ocean marine ecosystem, it is imperative that Washington be able to properly assess any potential risks to that ecosystem.

6. For these reasons, the legislature finds that it is appropriate to direct the University of Washington, home of one of the premiere oceanographic departments in the world, to study the cumulative effects of offshore wind generation on the oceanographic processes of the Pacific Ocean.

## Section 2
1. The University of Washington school of oceanography shall conduct a comprehensive scientific study on the cumulative effects, both positive and negative, of offshore wind development on oceanographic processes such as tides, waves, and currents, and in turn how changes in those processes could affect the broader marine ecosystem.

2. The topics that the University of Washington must address in the study include, but are not limited to:

    a. The impact that full projected build-out of offshore wind generation along the western coast of the United States is likely to have on ocean upwelling;

    b. The capacity for offshore wind turbines to both attract and repel fish and marine life; and

    c. The physical effects associated with wind turbine construction and operation, including water cloudiness, noise, vibrations, and disruptions to electromagnetic fields.

3. The University of Washington shall submit a copy of its study to the office of the governor and to the committees of the legislature with jurisdiction over energy and fishing by June 30, 2026.
