# 74.15 - Care of children, expectant mothers, persons with developmental disabilities.
* [74.15.010 - Declaration of purpose.](#7415010---declaration-of-purpose)
* [74.15.020 - Definitions. (Effective until January 1, 2022.)](#7415020---definitions-effective-until-january-1-2022)
* [74.15.030 - Powers and duties of secretary.](#7415030---powers-and-duties-of-secretary)
* [74.15.038 - Harm to child or client by individual hired by contracted agency—Department not liable.](#7415038---harm-to-child-or-client-by-individual-hired-by-contracted-agencydepartment-not-liable)
* [74.15.040 - Licenses for foster family homes required—Inspections.](#7415040---licenses-for-foster-family-homes-requiredinspections)
* [74.15.050 - Fire protection—Powers and duties of chief of the Washington state patrol.](#7415050---fire-protectionpowers-and-duties-of-chief-of-the-washington-state-patrol)
* [74.15.060 - Health protection—Powers and duties of secretary of health.](#7415060---health-protectionpowers-and-duties-of-secretary-of-health)
* [74.15.070 - Articles of incorporation and amendments—Copies to be furnished to department.](#7415070---articles-of-incorporation-and-amendmentscopies-to-be-furnished-to-department)
* [74.15.080 - Access to agencies, records.](#7415080---access-to-agencies-records)
* [74.15.090 - Licenses required for agencies.](#7415090---licenses-required-for-agencies)
* [74.15.100 - License application, issuance, duration—Reclassification—Location changes.](#7415100---license-application-issuance-durationreclassificationlocation-changes)
* [74.15.110 - Renewal of licenses.](#7415110---renewal-of-licenses)
* [74.15.120 - Initial licenses.](#7415120---initial-licenses)
* [74.15.125 - Probationary licenses—Child-specific licenses.](#7415125---probationary-licenseschild-specific-licenses)
* [74.15.127 - Expedited foster licensing process.](#7415127---expedited-foster-licensing-process)
* [74.15.130 - Licenses—Denial, suspension, revocation, modification—Procedures—Adjudicative proceedings—Penalties.](#7415130---licensesdenial-suspension-revocation-modificationproceduresadjudicative-proceedingspenalties)
* [74.15.132 - Adjudicative proceedings—Training for administrative law judges.](#7415132---adjudicative-proceedingstraining-for-administrative-law-judges)
* [74.15.134 - License or certificate suspension—Noncompliance with support order—Reissuance.](#7415134---license-or-certificate-suspensionnoncompliance-with-support-orderreissuance)
* [74.15.140 - Action against licensed or unlicensed agencies authorized.](#7415140---action-against-licensed-or-unlicensed-agencies-authorized)
* [74.15.150 - Penalty for operating without license.](#7415150---penalty-for-operating-without-license)
* [74.15.160 - Continuation of existing licensing rules.](#7415160---continuation-of-existing-licensing-rules)
* [74.15.170 - Agencies, homes conducted by religious organizations—Application of chapter.](#7415170---agencies-homes-conducted-by-religious-organizationsapplication-of-chapter)
* [74.15.180 - Designating home or facility as semi-secure facility.](#7415180---designating-home-or-facility-as-semi-secure-facility)
* [74.15.190 - Authority of Indian tribes to license agencies within reservations—Placement of children.](#7415190---authority-of-indian-tribes-to-license-agencies-within-reservationsplacement-of-children)
* [74.15.200 - Child abuse and neglect prevention training to parents and day care providers.](#7415200---child-abuse-and-neglect-prevention-training-to-parents-and-day-care-providers)
* [74.15.210 - Community facility—Service provider must report juvenile infractions or violations—Violations by service provider—Secretary's duties—Rules.](#7415210---community-facilityservice-provider-must-report-juvenile-infractions-or-violationsviolations-by-service-providersecretarys-dutiesrules)
* [74.15.230 - Responsible living skills programs—Established—Requirements.](#7415230---responsible-living-skills-programsestablishedrequirements)
* [74.15.240 - Responsible living skills program—Eligibility.](#7415240---responsible-living-skills-programeligibility)
* [74.15.250 - HOPE centers—Responsible living skills programs—Licensing authority—Rules.](#7415250---hope-centersresponsible-living-skills-programslicensing-authorityrules)
* [74.15.255 - Secure or semi-secure crisis residential centers and HOPE centers—Collaboration—Colocation—Requirement for licensing.](#7415255---secure-or-semi-secure-crisis-residential-centers-and-hope-centerscollaborationcolocationrequirement-for-licensing)
* [74.15.280 - Emergency respite centers—Licensing—Rules.](#7415280---emergency-respite-centerslicensingrules)
* [74.15.300 - Enforcement action—Definition.](#7415300---enforcement-actiondefinition)
* [74.15.311 - Resource and assessment centers—License.](#7415311---resource-and-assessment-centerslicense)
* [74.15.315 - Host home program registration. (Effective January 1, 2022.)](#7415315---host-home-program-registration-effective-january-1-2022)
* [74.15.900 - Short title—Purpose—Entitlement not granted—1999 c 267 §§ 10-26.](#7415900---short-titlepurposeentitlement-not-granted1999-c-267--10-26)
* [74.15.901 - Federal waivers—1999 c 267 §§ 10-26.](#7415901---federal-waivers1999-c-267--10-26)
* [74.15.902 - Construction—Chapter applicable to state registered domestic partnerships—2009 c 521.](#7415902---constructionchapter-applicable-to-state-registered-domestic-partnerships2009-c-521)
* [74.15.903 - Construction—Religious or nonprofit organizations.](#7415903---constructionreligious-or-nonprofit-organizations)
## 74.15.010 - Declaration of purpose.
The purpose of chapter 74.15 RCW and RCW 74.13.031 is:

1. To safeguard the health, safety, and well-being of children, expectant mothers and developmentally disabled persons receiving care away from their own homes, which is paramount over the right of any person to provide care;

2. To strengthen and encourage family unity and to sustain parental rights and responsibilities to the end that foster care is provided only when a child's family, through the use of all available resources, is unable to provide necessary care;

3. To promote the development of a sufficient number and variety of adequate foster family homes and maternity-care facilities, both public and private, through the cooperative efforts of public agencies and related groups;

4. To provide consultation to agencies caring for children, expectant mothers or developmentally disabled persons in order to help them to improve their methods of and facilities for care;

5. To license agencies as defined in RCW 74.15.020 and to assure the users of such agencies, their parents, the community at large and the agencies themselves that adequate minimum standards are maintained by all agencies caring for children, expectant mothers and developmentally disabled persons.

\[ [2018 c 284 § 65](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/2017-18/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/Senate/6407.SL.pdf?cite=2018%20c%20284%20§%2065); [2009 c 520 § 12](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/2009-10/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/House/2106-S2.SL.pdf?cite=2009%20c%20520%20§%2012); [1995 c 302 § 2](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/1995-96/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/House/1906-S.SL.pdf?cite=1995%20c%20302%20§%202); [1983 c 3 § 192](http://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1983c3.pdf?cite=1983%20c%203%20§%20192); [1977 ex.s. c 80 § 70](http://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1977ex1c80.pdf?cite=1977%20ex.s.%20c%2080%20§%2070); [1967 c 172 § 1](http://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1967c172.pdf?cite=1967%20c%20172%20§%201); \]

## 74.15.020 - Definitions. (Effective until January 1, 2022.)
The definitions in this section apply throughout this chapter and RCW 74.13.031 unless the context clearly requires otherwise.

1. "Agency" means any person, firm, partnership, association, corporation, or facility which receives children, expectant mothers, or persons with developmental disabilities for control, care, or maintenance outside their own homes, or which places, arranges the placement of, or assists in the placement of children, expectant mothers, or persons with developmental disabilities for foster care or placement of children for adoption, and shall include the following irrespective of whether there is compensation to the agency or to the children, expectant mothers, or persons with developmental disabilities for services rendered:

   a. "Child-placing agency" means an agency which places a child or children for temporary care, continued care, or for adoption;

   b. "Community facility" means a group care facility operated for the care of juveniles committed to the department under RCW 13.40.185. A county detention facility that houses juveniles committed to the department under RCW 13.40.185 pursuant to a contract with the department is not a community facility;

   c. "Crisis residential center" means an agency which is a temporary protective residential facility operated to perform the duties specified in chapter 13.32A RCW, in the manner provided in RCW 43.185C.295 through 43.185C.310;

   d. "Emergency respite center" is an agency that may be commonly known as a crisis nursery, that provides emergency and crisis care for up to seventy-two hours to children who have been admitted by their parents or guardians to prevent abuse or neglect. Emergency respite centers may operate for up to twenty-four hours a day, and for up to seven days a week. Emergency respite centers may provide care for children ages birth through seventeen, and for persons eighteen through twenty with developmental disabilities who are admitted with a sibling or siblings through age seventeen. Emergency respite centers may not substitute for crisis residential centers or HOPE centers, or any other services defined under this section, and may not substitute for services which are required under chapter 13.32A or 13.34 RCW;

   e. "Foster family home" means an agency which regularly provides care on a twenty-four hour basis to one or more children, expectant mothers, or persons with developmental disabilities in the family abode of the person or persons under whose direct care and supervision the child, expectant mother, or person with a developmental disability is placed;

   f. "Group-care facility" means an agency, other than a foster family home, which is maintained and operated for the care of a group of children on a twenty-four hour basis. "Group care facility" includes but is not limited to:

      i. Qualified residential treatment programs as defined in RCW 13.34.030;

      ii. Facilities specializing in providing prenatal, postpartum, or parenting supports for youth; and

      iii. Facilities providing high quality residential care and supportive services to children who are, or who are at risk of becoming, victims of sex trafficking;

   g. "HOPE center" means an agency licensed by the secretary to provide temporary residential placement and other services to street youth. A street youth may remain in a HOPE center for thirty days while services are arranged and permanent placement is coordinated. No street youth may stay longer than thirty days unless approved by the department and any additional days approved by the department must be based on the unavailability of a long-term placement option. A street youth whose parent wants him or her returned to home may remain in a HOPE center until his or her parent arranges return of the youth, not longer. All other street youth must have court approval under chapter 13.34 or 13.32A RCW to remain in a HOPE center up to thirty days;

   h. "Maternity service" means an agency which provides or arranges for care or services to expectant mothers, before or during confinement, or which provides care as needed to mothers and their infants after confinement;

   i. "Resource and assessment center" means an agency that provides short-term emergency and crisis care for a period up to seventy-two hours, excluding Saturdays, Sundays, and holidays to children who have been removed from their parent's or guardian's care by child protective services or law enforcement;

   j. "Responsible living skills program" means an agency licensed by the secretary that provides residential and transitional living services to persons ages sixteen to eighteen who are dependent under chapter 13.34 RCW and who have been unable to live in his or her legally authorized residence and, as a result, the minor lived outdoors or in another unsafe location not intended for occupancy by the minor. Dependent minors ages fourteen and fifteen may be eligible if no other placement alternative is available and the department approves the placement;

   k. "Service provider" means the entity that operates a community facility.

2. "Agency" shall not include the following:

   a. Persons related to the child, expectant mother, or person with developmental disability in the following ways:

      i. Any blood relative, including those of half-blood, and including first cousins, second cousins, nephews or nieces, and persons of preceding generations as denoted by prefixes of grand, great, or great-great;

      ii. Stepfather, stepmother, stepbrother, and stepsister;

      iii. A person who legally adopts a child or the child's parent as well as the natural and other legally adopted children of such persons, and other relatives of the adoptive parents in accordance with state law;

      iv. Spouses of any persons named in (a)(i), (ii), or (iii) of this subsection (2), even after the marriage is terminated;

      v. Relatives, as named in (a)(i), (ii), (iii), or (iv) of this subsection (2), of any half sibling of the child; or

      vi. Extended family members, as defined by the law or custom of the Indian child's tribe or, in the absence of such law or custom, a person who has reached the age of eighteen and who is the Indian child's grandparent, aunt or uncle, brother or sister, brother-in-law or sister-in-law, niece or nephew, first or second cousin, or stepparent who provides care in the family abode on a twenty-four-hour basis to an Indian child as defined in 25 U.S.C. Sec. 1903(4);

   b. Persons who are legal guardians of the child, expectant mother, or persons with developmental disabilities;

   c. Persons who care for a neighbor's or friend's child or children, with or without compensation, where the parent and person providing care on a twenty-four-hour basis have agreed to the placement in writing and the state is not providing any payment for the care;

   d. A person, partnership, corporation, or other entity that provides placement or similar services to exchange students or international student exchange visitors or persons who have the care of an exchange student in their home;

   e. A person, partnership, corporation, or other entity that provides placement or similar services to international children who have entered the country by obtaining visas that meet the criteria for medical care as established by the United States citizenship and immigration services, or persons who have the care of such an international child in their home;

   f. Schools, including boarding schools, which are engaged primarily in education, operate on a definite school year schedule, follow a stated academic curriculum, accept only school-age children and do not accept custody of children;

   g. Hospitals licensed pursuant to chapter 70.41 RCW when performing functions defined in chapter 70.41 RCW, nursing homes licensed under chapter 18.51 RCW and assisted living facilities licensed under chapter 18.20 RCW;

   h. Licensed physicians or lawyers;

   i. Facilities approved and certified under chapter 71A.22 RCW;

   j. Any agency having been in operation in this state ten years prior to June 8, 1967, and not seeking or accepting moneys or assistance from any state or federal agency, and is supported in part by an endowment or trust fund;

   k. Persons who have a child in their home for purposes of adoption, if the child was placed in such home by a licensed child-placing agency, an authorized public or tribal agency or court or if a replacement report has been filed under chapter 26.33 RCW and the placement has been approved by the court;

   l. An agency operated by any unit of local, state, or federal government or an agency licensed by an Indian tribe pursuant to RCW 74.15.190;

   m. A maximum or medium security program for juvenile offenders operated by or under contract with the department;

   n. An agency located on a federal military reservation, except where the military authorities request that such agency be subject to the licensing requirements of this chapter;

   o. [Empty]

      i. A host home program, and host home, operated by a tax exempt organization for youth not in the care of or receiving services from the department, if that program: (A) Recruits and screens potential homes in the program, including performing background checks on individuals over the age of eighteen residing in the home through the Washington state patrol or equivalent law enforcement agency and performing physical inspections of the home; (B) screens and provides case management services to youth in the program; (C) obtains a notarized permission slip or limited power of attorney from the parent or legal guardian of the youth authorizing the youth to participate in the program and the authorization is updated every six months when a youth remains in a host home longer than six months; (D) obtains insurance for the program through an insurance provider authorized under Title 48 RCW; (E) provides mandatory reporter and confidentiality training; and (F) registers with the secretary of state as provided in RCW 24.03.550.

      ii. For purposes of this section, a "host home" is a private home that volunteers to host youth in need of temporary placement that is associated with a host home program.

      iii. For purposes of this section, a "host home program" is a program that provides support to individual host homes and meets the requirements of (o)(i) of this subsection.

      iv. Any host home program that receives local, state, or government funding shall report the following information to the office of homeless youth prevention and protection programs annually by December 1st of each year: The number of children the program served, why the child was placed with a host home, and where the child went after leaving the host home, including but not limited to returning to the parents, running away, reaching the age of majority, or becoming a dependent of the state;

   p. Receiving centers as defined in RCW 7.68.380.

3. "Department" means the department of children, youth, and families.

4. "Juvenile" means a person under the age of twenty-one who has been sentenced to a term of confinement under the supervision of the department under RCW 13.40.185.

5. "Performance-based contracts" or "contracting" means the structuring of all aspects of the procurement of services around the purpose of the work to be performed and the desired results with the contract requirements set forth in clear, specific, and objective terms with measurable outcomes. Contracts may also include provisions that link the performance of the contractor to the level and timing of the reimbursement.

6. "Probationary license" means a license issued as a disciplinary measure to an agency that has previously been issued a full license but is out of compliance with licensing standards.

7. "Requirement" means any rule, regulation, or standard of care to be maintained by an agency.

8. "Secretary" means the secretary of the department.

9. "Street youth" means a person under the age of eighteen who lives outdoors or in another unsafe location not intended for occupancy by the minor and who is not residing with his or her parent or at his or her legally authorized residence.

10. "Transitional living services" means at a minimum, to the extent funds are available, the following:

    a. Educational services, including basic literacy and computational skills training, either in local alternative or public high schools or in a high school equivalency program that leads to obtaining a high school equivalency degree;

    b. Assistance and counseling related to obtaining vocational training or higher education, job readiness, job search assistance, and placement programs;

    c. Counseling and instruction in life skills such as money management, home management, consumer skills, parenting, health care, access to community resources, and transportation and housing options;

    d. Individual and group counseling; and

    e. Establishing networks with federal agencies and state and local organizations such as the United States department of labor, employment and training administration programs including the workforce innovation and opportunity act which administers private industry councils and the job corps; vocational rehabilitation; and volunteer programs.

\[ [2020 c 331 § 10](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/2019-20/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/House/1775-S3.SL.pdf?cite=2020%20c%20331%20§%2010); [2020 c 265 § 1](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/2019-20/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/Senate/6623.SL.pdf?cite=2020%20c%20265%20§%201); [2019 c 172 § 10](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/2019-20/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/House/1900.SL.pdf?cite=2019%20c%20172%20§%2010); [2018 c 284 § 67](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/2017-18/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/Senate/6407.SL.pdf?cite=2018%20c%20284%20§%2067); 2018 c 284 § 66; [2017 3rd sp.s. c 6 § 408](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/2017-18/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/House/1661-S2.SL.pdf?cite=2017%203rd%20sp.s.%20c%206%20§%20408); [2017 c 39 § 11](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/2017-18/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/Senate/5237.SL.pdf?cite=2017%20c%2039%20§%2011); [2016 c 166 § 1](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/2015-16/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/House/2440-S.SL.pdf?cite=2016%20c%20166%20§%201); [2013 c 105 § 2](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/2013-14/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/House/1261-S.SL.pdf?cite=2013%20c%20105%20§%202); [2012 c 10 § 61](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/2011-12/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/House/2056-S.SL.pdf?cite=2012%20c%2010%20§%2061); [2009 c 520 § 13](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/2009-10/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/House/2106-S2.SL.pdf?cite=2009%20c%20520%20§%2013); [2007 c 412 § 1](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/2007-08/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/House/1377.SL.pdf?cite=2007%20c%20412%20§%201); [2006 c 265 § 401](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/2005-06/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/House/2964-S2.SL.pdf?cite=2006%20c%20265%20§%20401); [2006 c 90 § 1](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/2005-06/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/House/3182-S.SL.pdf?cite=2006%20c%2090%20§%201); [2006 c 54 § 7](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/2005-06/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/House/2353-S2.SL.pdf?cite=2006%20c%2054%20§%207); prior:  2001 c 230 § 1; [2001 c 144 § 1](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/2001-02/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/House/1346.SL.pdf?cite=2001%20c%20144%20§%201); [2001 c 137 § 3](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/2001-02/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/House/1070.SL.pdf?cite=2001%20c%20137%20§%203); [1999 c 267 § 11](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/1999-00/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/House/1493-S2.SL.pdf?cite=1999%20c%20267%20§%2011); [1998 c 269 § 3](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/1997-98/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/Senate/6445-S2.SL.pdf?cite=1998%20c%20269%20§%203); [1997 c 245 § 7](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/1997-98/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/Senate/5018.SL.pdf?cite=1997%20c%20245%20§%207); prior:  1995 c 311 § 18; [1995 c 302 § 3](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/1995-96/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/House/1906-S.SL.pdf?cite=1995%20c%20302%20§%203); [1994 c 273 § 21](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/1993-94/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/Senate/6025.SL.pdf?cite=1994%20c%20273%20§%2021); [1991 c 128 § 14](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/1991-92/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/House/1051-S.SL.pdf?cite=1991%20c%20128%20§%2014); [1988 c 176 § 912](http://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1988c176.pdf?cite=1988%20c%20176%20§%20912); [1987 c 170 § 12](http://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1987c170.pdf?cite=1987%20c%20170%20§%2012); [1982 c 118 § 5](http://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1982c118.pdf?cite=1982%20c%20118%20§%205); [1979 c 155 § 83](http://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1979c155.pdf?cite=1979%20c%20155%20§%2083); [1977 ex.s. c 80 § 71](http://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1977ex1c80.pdf?cite=1977%20ex.s.%20c%2080%20§%2071); [1967 c 172 § 2](http://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1967c172.pdf?cite=1967%20c%20172%20§%202); \]

## 74.15.030 - Powers and duties of secretary.
The secretary shall have the power and it shall be the secretary's duty:

1. In consultation with the children's services advisory committee, and with the advice and assistance of persons representative of the various type agencies to be licensed, to designate categories of facilities for which separate or different requirements shall be developed as may be appropriate whether because of variations in the ages, sex and other characteristics of persons served, variations in the purposes and services offered or size or structure of the agencies to be licensed hereunder, or because of any other factor relevant thereto;

2. In consultation with the children's services advisory committee, and with the advice and assistance of persons representative of the various type agencies to be licensed, to adopt and publish minimum requirements for licensing applicable to each of the various categories of agencies to be licensed.

The minimum requirements shall be limited to:

   a. The size and suitability of a facility and the plan of operation for carrying out the purpose for which an applicant seeks a license;

   b. Obtaining background information and any out-of-state equivalent, to determine whether the applicant or service provider is disqualified and to determine the character, competence, and suitability of an agency, the agency's employees, volunteers, and other persons associated with an agency;

   c. Conducting background checks for those who will or may have unsupervised access to children or expectant mothers; however, a background check is not required if a caregiver approves an activity pursuant to the prudent parent standard contained in RCW 74.13.710;

   d. Obtaining child protective services information or records maintained in the department case management information system. No unfounded allegation of child abuse or neglect as defined in RCW 26.44.020 may be disclosed to a child-placing agency, private adoption agency, or any other provider licensed under this chapter;

   e. Submitting a fingerprint-based background check through the Washington state patrol under chapter 10.97 RCW and through the federal bureau of investigation for:

      i. Agencies and their staff, volunteers, students, and interns when the agency is seeking license or relicense;

      ii. Foster care and adoption placements; and

      iii. Any adult living in a home where a child may be placed;

   f. If any adult living in the home has not resided in the state of Washington for the preceding five years, the department shall review any child abuse and neglect registries maintained by any state where the adult has resided over the preceding five years;

   g. The cost of fingerprint background check fees will be paid as required in RCW 43.43.837;

   h. National and state background information must be used solely for the purpose of determining eligibility for a license and for determining the character, suitability, and competence of those persons or agencies, excluding parents, not required to be licensed who are authorized to care for children or expectant mothers;

   i. The number of qualified persons required to render the type of care and treatment for which an agency seeks a license;

   j. The safety, cleanliness, and general adequacy of the premises to provide for the comfort, care and well-being of children or expectant mothers;

   k. The provision of necessary care, including food, clothing, supervision and discipline; physical, mental and social well-being; and educational, recreational and spiritual opportunities for those served;

   l. The financial ability of an agency to comply with minimum requirements established pursuant to this chapter and RCW 74.13.031; and

   m. The maintenance of records pertaining to the admission, progress, health and discharge of persons served;

3. To investigate any person, including relatives by blood or marriage except for parents, for character, suitability, and competence in the care and treatment of children or expectant mothers prior to authorizing that person to care for children or expectant mothers. However, if a child is placed with a relative under RCW 13.34.065 or 13.34.130, and if such relative appears otherwise suitable and competent to provide care and treatment the criminal history background check required by this section need not be completed before placement, but shall be completed as soon as possible after placement;

4. On reports of alleged child abuse and neglect, to investigate agencies in accordance with chapter 26.44 RCW, including agencies or facilities operated by the department of social and health services that receive children for care outside their own homes, child day-care centers, and family day-care homes, to determine whether the alleged abuse or neglect has occurred, and whether child protective services or referral to a law enforcement agency is appropriate;

5. To issue, revoke, or deny licenses to agencies pursuant to this chapter and RCW 74.13.031. Licenses shall specify the category of care which an agency is authorized to render and the ages, sex and number of persons to be served;

6. To prescribe the procedures and the form and contents of reports necessary for the administration of this chapter and RCW 74.13.031 and to require regular reports from each licensee;

7. To inspect agencies periodically to determine whether or not there is compliance with this chapter and RCW 74.13.031 and the requirements adopted hereunder;

8. To review requirements adopted hereunder at least every two years and to adopt appropriate changes after consultation with affected groups for child day-care requirements and with the children's services advisory committee for requirements for other agencies; and

9. To consult with public and private agencies in order to help them improve their methods and facilities for the care of children or expectant mothers.

\[ [2019 c 470 § 20](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/2019-20/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/Senate/5955-S.SL.pdf?cite=2019%20c%20470%20§%2020); [2017 3rd sp.s. c 6 § 409](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/2017-18/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/House/1661-S2.SL.pdf?cite=2017%203rd%20sp.s.%20c%206%20§%20409); [2014 c 104 § 2](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/2013-14/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/Senate/6479-S.SL.pdf?cite=2014%20c%20104%20§%202); [2007 c 387 § 5](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/2007-08/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/Senate/5774-S.SL.pdf?cite=2007%20c%20387%20§%205); [2007 c 17 § 14](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/2007-08/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/Senate/5952-S.SL.pdf?cite=2007%20c%2017%20§%2014); prior:  2006 c 265 § 402; [2006 c 54 § 8](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/2005-06/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/House/2353-S2.SL.pdf?cite=2006%20c%2054%20§%208); [2005 c 490 § 11](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/2005-06/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/House/1152-S2.SL.pdf?cite=2005%20c%20490%20§%2011); prior:  2000 c 162 § 20; [2000 c 122 § 40](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/1999-00/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/Senate/6217-S.SL.pdf?cite=2000%20c%20122%20§%2040); [1997 c 386 § 33](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/1997-98/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/Senate/5710-S2.SL.pdf?cite=1997%20c%20386%20§%2033); [1995 c 302 § 4](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/1995-96/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/House/1906-S.SL.pdf?cite=1995%20c%20302%20§%204); [1988 c 189 § 3](http://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1988c189.pdf?cite=1988%20c%20189%20§%203); prior:  1987 c 524 § 13; [1987 c 486 § 14](http://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1987c486.pdf?cite=1987%20c%20486%20§%2014); [1984 c 188 § 5](http://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1984c188.pdf?cite=1984%20c%20188%20§%205); [1982 c 118 § 6](http://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1982c118.pdf?cite=1982%20c%20118%20§%206); [1980 c 125 § 1](http://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1980c125.pdf?cite=1980%20c%20125%20§%201); [1979 c 141 § 355](http://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1979c141.pdf?cite=1979%20c%20141%20§%20355); [1977 ex.s. c 80 § 72](http://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1977ex1c80.pdf?cite=1977%20ex.s.%20c%2080%20§%2072); [1967 c 172 § 3](http://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1967c172.pdf?cite=1967%20c%20172%20§%203); \]

## 74.15.038 - Harm to child or client by individual hired by contracted agency—Department not liable.
If an agency operating under contract with the department chooses to hire an individual that would be precluded from employment with the department based on a disqualifying crime or negative action, the department and its officers and employees have no liability arising from any injury or harm to a child or other department client that is attributable to such individual.

\[ [2018 c 58 § 56](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/2017-18/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/Senate/6287.SL.pdf?cite=2018%20c%2058%20§%2056); [2014 c 88 § 3](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/2013-14/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/Senate/6095-S.SL.pdf?cite=2014%20c%2088%20§%203); \]

## 74.15.040 - Licenses for foster family homes required—Inspections.
An agency seeking to accept and serve children, developmentally disabled persons, or expectant mothers as a foster family home shall make application for license in such form and substance as required by the department. The department shall maintain a list of applicants through which placement may be undertaken. However, agencies and the department shall not place a child, developmentally disabled person, or expectant mother in a home until the home is licensed. The department shall inquire whether an applicant has previously resided in any other state or foreign country and shall check databases available to it through the Washington state patrol and federal bureau of investigation to ascertain whether the applicant has ever been the subject of a conviction or civil finding outside of the state of Washington that bears upon the fitness of the applicant to serve as a foster family home. Foster family homes shall be inspected prior to licensure, except that inspection by the department is not required if the foster family home is under the supervision of a licensed agency upon certification to the department by the licensed agency that such homes meet the requirements for foster homes as adopted pursuant to chapter 74.15 RCW and RCW 74.13.031.

\[ [2008 c 232 § 3](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/2007-08/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/House/2835.SL.pdf?cite=2008%20c%20232%20§%203); [1982 c 118 § 7](http://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1982c118.pdf?cite=1982%20c%20118%20§%207); [1979 c 141 § 356](http://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1979c141.pdf?cite=1979%20c%20141%20§%20356); [1967 c 172 § 4](http://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1967c172.pdf?cite=1967%20c%20172%20§%204); \]

## 74.15.050 - Fire protection—Powers and duties of chief of the Washington state patrol.
The chief of the Washington state patrol, through the director of fire protection, shall have the power and it shall be his or her duty:

1. In consultation with the children's services advisory committee and with the advice and assistance of persons representative of the various type agencies to be licensed, to adopt recognized minimum standard requirements pertaining to each category of agency established pursuant to chapter 74.15 RCW and RCW 74.13.031, except foster family homes and child-placing agencies, necessary to protect all persons residing therein from fire hazards;

2. To make or cause to be made such inspections and investigations of agencies, other than foster family homes or child-placing agencies, as he or she deems necessary;

3. To make a periodic review of requirements under RCW 74.15.030(7) and to adopt necessary changes after consultation as required in subsection (1) of this section;

4. To issue to applicants for licenses hereunder, other than foster family homes or child-placing agencies, who comply with the requirements, a certificate of compliance, a copy of which shall be presented to the department before a license shall be issued, except that an initial license may be issued as provided in RCW 74.15.120.

\[ [2009 c 520 § 15](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/2009-10/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/House/2106-S2.SL.pdf?cite=2009%20c%20520%20§%2015); [1995 c 369 § 62](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/1995-96/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/Senate/5093-S.SL.pdf?cite=1995%20c%20369%20§%2062); [1986 c 266 § 123](http://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1986c266.pdf?cite=1986%20c%20266%20§%20123); [1982 c 118 § 8](http://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1982c118.pdf?cite=1982%20c%20118%20§%208); [1979 c 141 § 357](http://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1979c141.pdf?cite=1979%20c%20141%20§%20357); [1967 c 172 § 5](http://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1967c172.pdf?cite=1967%20c%20172%20§%205); \]

## 74.15.060 - Health protection—Powers and duties of secretary of health.
The secretary of health shall have the power and it shall be his or her duty:

In consultation with the children's services advisory committee and with the advice and assistance of persons representative of the various type agencies to be licensed, to develop minimum requirements pertaining to each category of agency established pursuant to chapter 74.15 RCW and RCW 74.13.031, necessary to promote the health of all persons residing therein.

The secretary of health or the city, county, or district health department designated by the secretary shall have the power and the duty:

1. To make or cause to be made such inspections and investigations of agencies as may be deemed necessary; and

2. To issue to applicants for licenses hereunder who comply with the requirements adopted hereunder, a certificate of compliance, a copy of which shall be presented to the department before a license shall be issued, except that an initial license may be issued as provided in RCW 74.15.120.

\[ [2017 3rd sp.s. c 6 § 410](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/2017-18/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/House/1661-S2.SL.pdf?cite=2017%203rd%20sp.s.%20c%206%20§%20410); [1991 c 3 § 376](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/1991-92/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/House/1115.SL.pdf?cite=1991%20c%203%20§%20376); [1989 1st ex.s. c 9 § 265](http://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1989ex1c9.pdf?cite=1989%201st%20ex.s.%20c%209%20§%20265); [1987 c 524 § 14](http://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1987c524.pdf?cite=1987%20c%20524%20§%2014); [1982 c 118 § 9](http://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1982c118.pdf?cite=1982%20c%20118%20§%209); [1970 ex.s. c 18 § 14](http://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1970ex1c18.pdf?cite=1970%20ex.s.%20c%2018%20§%2014); [1967 c 172 § 6](http://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1967c172.pdf?cite=1967%20c%20172%20§%206); \]

## 74.15.070 - Articles of incorporation and amendments—Copies to be furnished to department.
A copy of the articles of incorporation of any agency or amendments to the articles of existing corporation agencies shall be sent by the secretary of state to the department at the time such articles or amendments are filed.

\[ [2017 3rd sp.s. c 6 § 411](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/2017-18/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/House/1661-S2.SL.pdf?cite=2017%203rd%20sp.s.%20c%206%20§%20411); [1979 c 141 § 358](http://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1979c141.pdf?cite=1979%20c%20141%20§%20358); [1967 c 172 § 7](http://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1967c172.pdf?cite=1967%20c%20172%20§%207); \]

## 74.15.080 - Access to agencies, records.
All agencies subject to chapter 74.15 RCW and RCW 74.13.031 shall accord the department, the secretary of health, the chief of the Washington state patrol, and the director of fire protection, or their designees, the right of entrance and the privilege of access to and inspection of records for the purpose of determining whether or not there is compliance with the provisions of chapter 74.15 RCW and RCW 74.13.031 and the requirements adopted thereunder.

\[ [2017 3rd sp.s. c 6 § 412](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/2017-18/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/House/1661-S2.SL.pdf?cite=2017%203rd%20sp.s.%20c%206%20§%20412); [1995 c 369 § 63](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/1995-96/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/Senate/5093-S.SL.pdf?cite=1995%20c%20369%20§%2063); [1989 1st ex.s. c 9 § 266](http://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1989ex1c9.pdf?cite=1989%201st%20ex.s.%20c%209%20§%20266); [1986 c 266 § 124](http://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1986c266.pdf?cite=1986%20c%20266%20§%20124); [1979 c 141 § 359](http://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1979c141.pdf?cite=1979%20c%20141%20§%20359); [1967 c 172 § 8](http://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1967c172.pdf?cite=1967%20c%20172%20§%208); \]

## 74.15.090 - Licenses required for agencies.
Except as provided in RCW 74.15.190, it shall hereafter be unlawful for any agency to receive children, expectant mothers or developmentally disabled persons for supervision or care, or arrange for the placement of such persons, unless such agency is licensed as provided in chapter 74.15 RCW.

\[ [1987 c 170 § 14](http://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1987c170.pdf?cite=1987%20c%20170%20§%2014); [1982 c 118 § 10](http://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1982c118.pdf?cite=1982%20c%20118%20§%2010); [1977 ex.s. c 80 § 73](http://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1977ex1c80.pdf?cite=1977%20ex.s.%20c%2080%20§%2073); [1967 c 172 § 9](http://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1967c172.pdf?cite=1967%20c%20172%20§%209); \]

## 74.15.100 - License application, issuance, duration—Reclassification—Location changes.
Each agency shall make application for a license or renewal of license to the department on forms prescribed by the department. A licensed agency having foster family homes under its supervision may make application for a license on behalf of any such foster family home. Such a foster home license shall cease to be valid when the home is no longer under the supervision of that agency. Upon receipt of such application, the department shall either grant or deny a license within ninety days unless the application is for licensure as a foster family home, in which case RCW 74.15.040 shall govern. A license shall be granted if the agency meets the minimum requirements set forth in this chapter and RCW 74.13.031 and the departmental requirements consistent herewith, except that an initial license may be issued as provided in RCW 74.15.120. Licenses provided for in this chapter and RCW 74.13.031 shall be issued for a period of three years. The licensee, however, shall advise the secretary of any material change in circumstances which might constitute grounds for reclassification of license as to category. The license issued under this chapter is not transferable and applies only to the licensee. The license shall be limited to a particular location which shall be stated on the license. For licensed foster family homes having an acceptable history of child care, the license may remain in effect for thirty days after a move, except that this will apply only if the family remains intact and children are placed in their care. Licensees must notify their licensor before moving to a new location and may request a continuation of the license at the new location. The department shall conduct a home inspection following notification that a foster family home has moved to a new location. Provided the new location and licensees meet minimum licensing standards, the licensor shall amend the license to reflect the new location. Licensees whose family remains intact and have no children placed in their care at the time of a move to a new location shall notify their licensor within ninety days of moving. If the licensee is in good standing at the time of the move, the licensor shall place the home on no-referral status and complete a home inspection within thirty days of notification. Such licensees shall remain on no-referral status and no new placements may be made in their home until the inspection is complete and the licensor determines that the new location meets minimum licensing standards.

\[ [2020 c 73 § 2](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/2019-20/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/Senate/6500-S.SL.pdf?cite=2020%20c%2073%20§%202); [2018 c 284 § 68](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/2017-18/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/Senate/6407.SL.pdf?cite=2018%20c%20284%20§%2068); [2009 c 520 § 16](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/2009-10/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/House/2106-S2.SL.pdf?cite=2009%20c%20520%20§%2016); [2009 c 206 § 1](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/2009-10/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/Senate/5015.SL.pdf?cite=2009%20c%20206%20§%201); [2006 c 265 § 403](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/2005-06/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/House/2964-S2.SL.pdf?cite=2006%20c%20265%20§%20403); [1995 c 302 § 8](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/1995-96/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/House/1906-S.SL.pdf?cite=1995%20c%20302%20§%208); [1982 c 118 § 11](http://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1982c118.pdf?cite=1982%20c%20118%20§%2011); [1979 c 141 § 360](http://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1979c141.pdf?cite=1979%20c%20141%20§%20360); [1967 c 172 § 10](http://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1967c172.pdf?cite=1967%20c%20172%20§%2010); \]

## 74.15.110 - Renewal of licenses.
If a licensee desires to apply for a renewal of its license, a request for a renewal shall be filed ninety days prior to the expiration date of the license except that a request for renewal of a foster family home license shall be filed prior to the expiration of the license. If the department has failed to act at the time of the expiration date of the license, the license shall continue in effect until such time as the department shall act.

\[ [1991 c 14 § 1](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/1991-92/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/Senate/5090-S.SL.pdf?cite=1991%20c%2014%20§%201); [1967 c 172 § 11](http://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1967c172.pdf?cite=1967%20c%20172%20§%2011); \]

## 74.15.120 - Initial licenses.
The secretary may, at his or her discretion, issue an initial license instead of a full license, to an agency or facility for a period not to exceed six months, renewable for a period not to exceed two years, to allow such agency or facility reasonable time to become eligible for full license. An initial license shall not be granted to any foster family home except as specified in this section. An initial license may be granted to a foster family home only if the following three conditions are met: (1) The license is limited so that the licensee is authorized to provide care only to a specific child or specific children; (2) the department has determined that the licensee has a relationship with the child, and the child is comfortable with the licensee, or that it would otherwise be in the child's best interest to remain or be placed in the licensee's home; and (3) the initial license is issued for a period not to exceed ninety days.

\[ [2017 3rd sp.s. c 6 § 413](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/2017-18/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/House/1661-S2.SL.pdf?cite=2017%203rd%20sp.s.%20c%206%20§%20413); [1995 c 311 § 22](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/1995-96/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/Senate/5885-S.SL.pdf?cite=1995%20c%20311%20§%2022); [1979 c 141 § 361](http://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1979c141.pdf?cite=1979%20c%20141%20§%20361); [1967 c 172 § 12](http://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1967c172.pdf?cite=1967%20c%20172%20§%2012); \]

## **74.15.125 - Probationary licenses—Child-specific licenses.**
1. The department may issue a probationary license to a licensee who has had a license but is temporarily unable to comply with a rule or has been the subject of multiple complaints or concerns about noncompliance if:

    a. The noncompliance does not present an immediate threat to the health and well-being of the children but would be likely to do so if allowed to continue; and

    b. The licensee has a plan approved by the department to correct the area of noncompliance within the probationary period.

2. A probationary license may be issued for up to six months, and at the discretion of the department it may be extended for an additional six months. The department shall immediately terminate the probationary license, if at any time the noncompliance for which the probationary license was issued presents an immediate threat to the health or well-being of the children.

3. The department may, at any time, issue a probationary license for due cause that states the conditions of probation.

4. An existing license is invalidated when a probationary license is issued.

5. At the expiration of the probationary license, the department shall reinstate the original license for the remainder of its term, issue a new license, or revoke the original license.

6. A right to an adjudicative proceeding shall not accrue to the licensee whose license has been placed on probationary status unless the licensee does not agree with the placement on probationary status and the department then suspends, revokes, or modifies the license.

7. [Empty]

    a. **The department may issue a child-specific license to a relative, as defined in RCW 13.36.020, or a suitable person, as defined in RCW 13.36.020, who opts to become licensed for placement of a specific child and that child's siblings or relatives in the department's care, custody, and control.**

    b. **Such individuals must meet all minimum licensing requirements for foster family homes established pursuant to RCW 74.15.030 and are subject to child-specific license criteria, which the department is authorized to establish by rule.**

    c. **For purposes of federal funding, a child-specific license is considered a full license with all of the rights and responsibilities of a foster family home license, except that at the discretion of the department the licensee may only receive placement of specific children pursuant to (a) of this subsection.**

    d. **Placement with a relative or suitable person who holds a child-specific license is subject to the department's sole discretion. A child-specific license does not confer upon the licensee a right to placement of a particular child, nor does it confer party status in any proceeding under chapter 13.34 RCW.**

    e. **The department shall seek input from the following stakeholders during the development and adoption of rules necessary to implement this section: Representatives from the kinship care oversight committee, an organization that represents current and former foster youth, an organization that represents child placing agencies, and a statewide advisory group of foster youth and alumni of foster care. The department shall seek tribal input as outlined in the department's government-to-government policy, per RCW 43.376.020.**

## 74.15.127 - Expedited foster licensing process.
1. The department shall design and implement an expedited foster licensing process.

2. The expedited foster licensing process described in this section shall be available to individuals who:

   a. Were licensed within the last five years;

   b. Were not the subject of an adverse licensing action or a voluntary relinquishment;

   c. Seek licensure for the same residence for which he or she was previously licensed provided that any changes to family constellation since the previous license is limited to individuals leaving the family constellation; and

   d. Apply to the same agency for which he or she was previously licensed, with the understanding that the agency must be agreeable to supervise the home.

3. The department shall make every effort to ensure that individuals qualifying for and seeking an expedited license are able to become licensed within forty days of the department receiving his or her application.

4. The department shall only issue a foster license pursuant to this section after receiving a completed fingerprint-based background check, and may delay issuance of an expedited license solely based on awaiting the results of a background check.

5. The department may issue a provisional expedited license pursuant to this section before completing a home study, but shall complete the home study as soon as possible after issuing a provisional expedited license.

6. The department and its officers, agents, employees, and volunteers are not liable for injuries caused by the expedited foster licensing process.

\[ [2017 3rd sp.s. c 20 § 4](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/2017-18/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/Senate/5890-S.SL.pdf?cite=2017%203rd%20sp.s.%20c%2020%20§%204); \]

## 74.15.130 - Licenses—Denial, suspension, revocation, modification—Procedures—Adjudicative proceedings—Penalties.
1. An agency may be denied a license, or any license issued pursuant to chapter 74.15 RCW and RCW 74.13.031 may be suspended, revoked, modified, or not renewed by the secretary upon proof (a) that the agency has failed or refused to comply with the provisions of chapter 74.15 RCW and RCW 74.13.031 or the requirements promulgated pursuant to the provisions of chapter 74.15 RCW and RCW 74.13.031; or (b) that the conditions required for the issuance of a license under chapter 74.15 RCW and RCW 74.13.031 have ceased to exist with respect to such licenses. RCW 43.20A.205 governs notice of a license denial, revocation, suspension, or modification and provides the right to an adjudicative proceeding.

2. In any adjudicative proceeding regarding the denial, modification, suspension, or revocation of a foster family home license, the department's decision shall be upheld if there is reasonable cause to believe that:

   a. The applicant or licensee lacks the character, suitability, or competence to care for children placed in out-of-home care, however, no unfounded, inconclusive, or screened-out report of child abuse or neglect may be used to deny employment or a license;

   b. The applicant or licensee has failed or refused to comply with any provision of chapter 74.15 RCW, RCW 74.13.031, or the requirements adopted pursuant to such provisions; or

   c. The conditions required for issuance of a license under chapter 74.15 RCW and RCW 74.13.031 have ceased to exist with respect to such licenses.

3. In any adjudicative proceeding regarding the denial, modification, suspension, or revocation of any license under this chapter, other than a foster family home license, the department's decision shall be upheld if it is supported by a preponderance of the evidence.

4. The department may assess civil monetary penalties upon proof that an agency has failed or refused to comply with the rules adopted under the provisions of this chapter and RCW 74.13.031 or that an agency subject to licensing under this chapter and RCW 74.13.031 is operating without a license except that civil monetary penalties shall not be levied against a licensed foster home. Monetary penalties levied against unlicensed agencies that submit an application for licensure within thirty days of notification and subsequently become licensed will be forgiven. These penalties may be assessed in addition to or in lieu of other disciplinary actions. Civil monetary penalties, if imposed, may be assessed and collected, with interest, for each day an agency is or was out of compliance. Civil monetary penalties shall not exceed two hundred fifty dollars per violation for group homes and child-placing agencies. Each day upon which the same or substantially similar action occurs is a separate violation subject to the assessment of a separate penalty. The department shall provide a notification period before a monetary penalty is effective and may forgive the penalty levied if the agency comes into compliance during this period. The department may suspend, revoke, or not renew a license for failure to pay a civil monetary penalty it has assessed pursuant to this chapter within ten days after such assessment becomes final. Chapter 43.20A RCW governs notice of a civil monetary penalty and provides the right of an adjudicative proceeding. The preponderance of evidence standard shall apply in adjudicative proceedings related to assessment of civil monetary penalties.

\[ [2007 c 220 § 6](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/2007-08/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/Senate/5321-S.SL.pdf?cite=2007%20c%20220%20§%206); [2006 c 265 § 404](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/2005-06/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/House/2964-S2.SL.pdf?cite=2006%20c%20265%20§%20404); [2005 c 473 § 6](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/2005-06/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/Senate/5806-S.SL.pdf?cite=2005%20c%20473%20§%206); [1998 c 314 § 6](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/1997-98/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/House/2556-S.SL.pdf?cite=1998%20c%20314%20§%206); [1995 c 302 § 5](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/1995-96/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/House/1906-S.SL.pdf?cite=1995%20c%20302%20§%205); [1989 c 175 § 149](http://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1989c175.pdf?cite=1989%20c%20175%20§%20149); [1982 c 118 § 12](http://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1982c118.pdf?cite=1982%20c%20118%20§%2012); [1979 c 141 § 362](http://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1979c141.pdf?cite=1979%20c%20141%20§%20362); [1967 c 172 § 13](http://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1967c172.pdf?cite=1967%20c%20172%20§%2013); \]

## 74.15.132 - Adjudicative proceedings—Training for administrative law judges.
1. The office of administrative hearings shall not assign nor allow an administrative law judge to preside over an adjudicative hearing regarding denial, modification, suspension, or revocation of any license to provide child care, including foster care, under this chapter, unless such judge has received training related to state and federal laws and department policies and procedures regarding:

   a. Child abuse, neglect, and maltreatment;

   b. Child protective services investigations and standards;

   c. Licensing activities and standards;

   d. Child development; and

   e. Parenting skills.

2. The office of administrative hearings shall develop and implement a training program that carries out the requirements of this section. The office of administrative hearings shall consult and coordinate with the department in developing the training program. The department may assist the office of administrative hearings in developing and providing training to administrative law judges.

\[ [1995 c 302 § 6](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/1995-96/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/House/1906-S.SL.pdf?cite=1995%20c%20302%20§%206); \]

## 74.15.134 - License or certificate suspension—Noncompliance with support order—Reissuance.
The secretary shall immediately suspend the license or certificate of a person who has been certified pursuant to RCW 74.20A.320 by the department as a person who is not in compliance with a support order. If the person has continued to meet all other requirements for reinstatement during the suspension, reissuance of the license or certificate shall be automatic upon the secretary's receipt of a release issued by the department stating that the licensee is in compliance with the order.

\[ [2017 3rd sp.s. c 6 § 414](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/2017-18/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/House/1661-S2.SL.pdf?cite=2017%203rd%20sp.s.%20c%206%20§%20414); [1997 c 58 § 858](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/1997-98/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/House/3901.SL.pdf?cite=1997%20c%2058%20§%20858); \]

## 74.15.140 - Action against licensed or unlicensed agencies authorized.
Notwithstanding the existence or pursuit of any other remedy, the secretary may, in the manner provided by law, upon the advice of the attorney general, who shall represent the department in the proceeding, maintain an action in the name of the state for injunction or such other relief as he or she may deem advisable against any agency subject to licensing under the provisions of chapter 74.15 RCW and RCW 74.13.031 or against any such agency not having a license as heretofore provided in chapter 74.15 RCW and RCW 74.13.031.

\[ [2013 c 23 § 213](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/2013-14/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/Senate/5077-S.SL.pdf?cite=2013%20c%2023%20§%20213); [1979 c 141 § 363](http://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1979c141.pdf?cite=1979%20c%20141%20§%20363); [1967 c 172 § 14](http://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1967c172.pdf?cite=1967%20c%20172%20§%2014); \]

## 74.15.150 - Penalty for operating without license.
Any agency operating without a license shall be guilty of a misdemeanor. This section shall not be enforceable against an agency until sixty days after the effective date of new rules, applicable to such agency, have been adopted under chapter 74.15 RCW and RCW 74.13.031.

\[ [1982 c 118 § 13](http://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1982c118.pdf?cite=1982%20c%20118%20§%2013); [1967 c 172 § 15](http://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1967c172.pdf?cite=1967%20c%20172%20§%2015); \]

## 74.15.160 - Continuation of existing licensing rules.
Existing rules for licensing adopted pursuant to *chapter 74.14 RCW, sections 74.14.010 through 74.14.150, chapter 26, Laws of 1959, shall remain in force and effect until new rules are adopted under chapter 74.15 RCW and RCW 74.13.031, but not thereafter.

\[ [1982 c 118 § 14](http://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1982c118.pdf?cite=1982%20c%20118%20§%2014); [1967 c 172 § 16](http://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1967c172.pdf?cite=1967%20c%20172%20§%2016); \]

## 74.15.170 - Agencies, homes conducted by religious organizations—Application of chapter.
Nothing in this chapter or the rules and regulations adopted pursuant thereto shall be construed as authorizing the supervision, regulation, or control of the remedial care or treatment of residents of any agency, children's institution, child-placing agency, maternity home, day or hourly nursery, foster home or other related institution conducted for or by members of a recognized religious sect, denomination or organization which in accordance with its creed, tenets, or principles depends for healing upon prayer in the practice of religion, nor shall the existence of any of the above conditions militate against the licensing of such a home or institution.

\[ [1967 c 172 § 21](http://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1967c172.pdf?cite=1967%20c%20172%20§%2021); \]

## 74.15.180 - Designating home or facility as semi-secure facility.
The department, pursuant to rules, may enable any licensed foster family home or group care facility to be designated as a semi-secure facility, as defined by RCW 13.32A.030.

\[ [1979 c 155 § 84](http://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1979c155.pdf?cite=1979%20c%20155%20§%2084); \]

## 74.15.190 - Authority of Indian tribes to license agencies within reservations—Placement of children.
1. [Empty]

   a. The state of Washington recognizes the authority of Indian tribes within the state to license agencies, located within the boundaries of a federally recognized Indian reservation, to receive children for control, care, and maintenance outside their own homes, or to place, receive, arrange the placement of, or assist in the placement of children for foster care or adoption.

   b. The state of Washington recognizes the ability of the Indian tribes within the state to enter into agreements with the state to license agencies located on or near the federally recognized Indian reservation or, for those federally recognized tribes that do not have a reservation, then on or near the federally designated service delivery area, to receive children for control, care, and maintenance outside their own homes, or to place, receive, arrange the placement of, or assist in the placement of children for foster care.

   c. The department and state licensed child-placing agencies may place children in tribally licensed facilities if the requirements of *RCW 74.15.030 (2)(b) and (3) and supporting rules are satisfied before placing the children in such facilities by the department or any state licensed child-placing agency.

2. The department may enter into written agreements with Indian tribes within the state to define the terms under which the tribe may license agencies pursuant to subsection (1) of this section. The agreements shall include a definition of what are the geographic boundaries of the tribe for the purposes of licensing and may include locations on or near the federally recognized Indian reservation or, for those federally recognized tribes that do not have a reservation, then on or near the federally designated service delivery area.

3. The department and its employees are immune from civil liability for damages arising from the conduct of agencies licensed by a tribe.

\[ [2006 c 90 § 2](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/2005-06/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/House/3182-S.SL.pdf?cite=2006%20c%2090%20§%202); [1987 c 170 § 13](http://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1987c170.pdf?cite=1987%20c%20170%20§%2013); \]

## 74.15.200 - Child abuse and neglect prevention training to parents and day care providers.
The department shall have primary responsibility for providing child abuse and neglect prevention training to parents and licensed child day care providers of preschool age children participating in day care programs meeting the requirements of chapter 74.15 RCW. The department may limit training under this section to trainers' workshops and curriculum development using existing resources.

\[ [2017 3rd sp.s. c 6 § 415](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/2017-18/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/House/1661-S2.SL.pdf?cite=2017%203rd%20sp.s.%20c%206%20§%20415); [1987 c 489 § 5](http://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1987c489.pdf?cite=1987%20c%20489%20§%205); \]

## 74.15.210 - Community facility—Service provider must report juvenile infractions or violations—Violations by service provider—Secretary's duties—Rules.
1. Whenever the secretary contracts with a service provider to operate a community facility, the contract shall include a requirement that each service provider must report to the department any known infraction or violation of conditions committed by any juvenile under its supervision. The report must be made immediately upon learning of serious infractions or violations and within twenty-four hours for other infractions or violations.

2. The secretary shall adopt rules to implement and enforce the provisions of this section. The rules shall contain a schedule of monetary penalties not to exceed the total compensation set forth in the contract, and include provisions that allow the secretary to terminate all contracts with a service provider that has violations of this section and the rules adopted under this section.

3. The secretary shall document in writing all violations of this section and the rules adopted under this section, penalties, actions by the department to remove juveniles from a community facility, and contract terminations. The department shall give great weight to a service provider's record of violations, penalties, actions by the department to remove juveniles from a community facility, and contract terminations in determining to execute, renew, or renegotiate a contract with a service provider.

\[ [1998 c 269 § 7](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/1997-98/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/Senate/6445-S2.SL.pdf?cite=1998%20c%20269%20§%207); \]

## 74.15.230 - Responsible living skills programs—Established—Requirements.
The secretary shall establish responsible living skills programs that provide no more than seventy-five beds across the state and may establish responsible living skills programs by contract, within funds appropriated by the legislature specifically for this purpose. Responsible living skills programs shall have the following:

1. A license issued by the secretary;

2. A professional with a master's degree in counseling, social work, or related field and at least one year of experience working with street youth available to serve residents or a bachelor of arts degree in social work or a related field and five years of experience working with street youth. The professional shall provide counseling services and interface with other relevant resources and systems to prepare the minor for adult living. Preference shall be given to those professionals cross-credentialed in mental health and chemical dependency;

3. Staff trained in development needs of older adolescents eligible to participate in responsible living skills programs as determined by the secretary;

4. Transitional living services and a therapeutic model of service delivery that provides necessary program supervision of residents and at the same time includes a philosophy, program structure, and treatment planning that emphasizes achievement of competency in independent living skills. Independent living skills include achieving basic educational requirements such as a high school equivalency certificate as provided in RCW 28B.50.536, enrollment in vocational and technical training programs offered at the community and vocational colleges, obtaining and maintaining employment; accomplishing basic life skills such as money management, nutrition, preparing meals, and cleaning house. A baseline skill level in ability to function productively and independently shall be determined at entry. Performance shall be measured and must demonstrate improvement from involvement in the program. Each resident shall have a plan for achieving independent living skills by the time the resident leaves the placement. The plan shall be written within the first thirty days of placement and reviewed every ninety days. A resident who fails to consistently adhere to the elements of the plan shall be subject to reassessment by the professional staff of the program and may be placed outside the program; and

5. A data collection system that measures outcomes for the population served, and enables research and evaluation that can be used for future program development and service delivery. Data collection systems must have confidentiality rules and protocols developed by the secretary.

6. The department shall not award contracts for the operation of responsible living skills programs until HOPE center beds are operational.

\[ [2013 c 39 § 31](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/2013-14/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/House/1686-S.SL.pdf?cite=2013%20c%2039%20§%2031); [1999 c 267 § 13](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/1999-00/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/House/1493-S2.SL.pdf?cite=1999%20c%20267%20§%2013); \]

## 74.15.240 - Responsible living skills program—Eligibility.
To be eligible for placement in a responsible living skills program, the minor must be dependent under chapter 13.34 RCW and must have lived in a HOPE center or in a secure crisis residential center. However, if the minor's caseworker determines that placement in a responsible living skills program would be the most appropriate placement given the minor's current circumstances, prior residence in a HOPE center or secure crisis residential center before placement in a responsible living program is not required. Responsible living skills [skill] centers are intended as a placement alternative for dependent youth that the department chooses for the youth because no other services or alternative placements have been successful. Responsible living skills [skill] centers are not for dependent youth whose permanency plan includes return to home or family reunification.

\[ [2008 c 267 § 11](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/2007-08/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/Senate/6792-S.SL.pdf?cite=2008%20c%20267%20§%2011); [1999 c 267 § 14](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/1999-00/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/House/1493-S2.SL.pdf?cite=1999%20c%20267%20§%2014); \]

## 74.15.250 - HOPE centers—Responsible living skills programs—Licensing authority—Rules.
The secretary is authorized to license HOPE centers and responsible living skills programs that meet statutory and rule requirements created by the secretary. The secretary is authorized to develop rules necessary to carry out the provisions of sections 10 through 26, chapter 267, Laws of 1999. The secretary may rely upon existing licensing provisions in development of licensing requirements for HOPE centers and responsible living skills programs, as are appropriate to carry out the intent of sections 10 through 26, chapter 267, Laws of 1999. HOPE centers and responsible living skills programs shall be required to adhere to departmental regulations prohibiting the use of alcohol, tobacco, controlled substances, violence, and sexual activity between residents.

\[ [1999 c 267 § 15](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/1999-00/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/House/1493-S2.SL.pdf?cite=1999%20c%20267%20§%2015); \]

## 74.15.255 - Secure or semi-secure crisis residential centers and HOPE centers—Collaboration—Colocation—Requirement for licensing.
1. [Empty]

   a. Within available funds appropriated for this purpose, the department shall contract for a continuum of short-term stabilization services pursuant to RCW 13.32A.030 and * 74.15.220. The department shall collaborate with service providers in a manner that allows secure and semi-secure crisis residential centers and HOPE centers to be located in a geographically representative manner and to facilitate the coordination of services provided for youth by such programs. To achieve efficiencies and increase utilization, the department shall allow the colocation of these centers in the same building or structure, except that a youth may not be placed in a secure facility or the secure portion of a colocated facility except as specifically authorized by chapter 13.32A RCW. The department shall allow the colocation of these centers only if the entity operating the facility agrees to designate a particular number of beds to each type of center that is located within the building or structure. The beds so designated must be used only to serve the eligible youth in the program or center for which they are designated.

   b. The department shall adopt rules to allow the licensing of colocated facilities that include any combination of secure or semi-secure crisis residential centers as defined in RCW 13.32A.030, or HOPE centers as defined in RCW 74.15.020. Such rules may provide for flexible payment structures, center specific licensing waivers, or other appropriate methods to increase utilization and provide flexibility, while continuing to meet the statutory goals of the programs. The rules shall provide that a condition of being licensed as a colocated facility is that the contracting entity must designate a particular number of beds in the colocated facility to each type of center that is located within the building or structure. The beds so designated must be used only to serve the eligible youth in the program or center for which they are designated.

2. The department shall require that to be licensed or continue to be licensed as a secure or semi-secure crisis residential center or HOPE center that the center has on staff, or otherwise has access to, a person who has been trained to work with the needs of sexually exploited children. For purposes of this subsection, "sexually exploited child" means that person as defined in **RCW 13.32A.030(17).

\[ [2011 c 240 § 3](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/2011-12/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/House/1858-S.SL.pdf?cite=2011%20c%20240%20§%203); [2010 c 289 § 10](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/2009-10/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/Senate/6476-S.SL.pdf?cite=2010%20c%20289%20§%2010); \]

## 74.15.280 - Emergency respite centers—Licensing—Rules.
The secretary is authorized to license emergency respite centers. The department may adopt rules to specify licensing requirements for emergency respite centers.

\[ [2001 c 230 § 2](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/2001-02/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/House/1898.SL.pdf?cite=2001%20c%20230%20§%202); \]

## 74.15.300 - Enforcement action—Definition.
For the purposes of chapter 473, Laws of 2005, "enforcement action" means denial, suspension, revocation, modification, or nonrenewal of a license pursuant to RCW 74.15.130(1) or assessment of civil monetary penalties pursuant to RCW 74.15.130(4).

\[ [2005 c 473 § 2](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/2005-06/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/Senate/5806-S.SL.pdf?cite=2005%20c%20473%20§%202); \]

## 74.15.311 - Resource and assessment centers—License.
1. The secretary is authorized to license resource and assessment centers if the agency meets the following requirements:

   a. There is a demonstrated need in the local community for a resource and assessment center;

   b. The resource and assessment center will be primarily staffed by trained volunteers; and

   c. The resource and assessment center demonstrates it is not financially dependent on reimbursement from the state to operate.

2. The department may adopt rules to specify licensing requirements for resource and assessment centers. Rules adopted by the department shall allow:

   a. A sufficient number of trained volunteers to meet staffing requirements;

   b. Flexibility in hours of operation and not require the resource and assessment center to be open if there are no children in its care; and

   c. The ability to operate in a residential area.

3. Resource and assessment centers licensed under this section may:

   a. Provide care for children ages birth through twelve, or for children ages thirteen through seventeen who have a sibling or siblings under thirteen years of age who are being admitted to the resource and assessment center; and

   b. Operate up to twenty-four hours per day, and for up to seven days per week.

4. Resource and assessment centers may not be used to address placement disruptions for children who have been removed from a foster home because of behavior or safety concerns.

\[ [2013 c 105 § 3](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/2013-14/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/House/1261-S.SL.pdf?cite=2013%20c%20105%20§%203); \]

## 74.15.315 - Host home program registration. (Effective January 1, 2022.)
1. A host home program must register with the secretary of state's office. This registration may occur when the secretary of state files articles of incorporation of the host home program under chapter 24.03A RCW.

2. The host home program registration must include a notarized statement by the host home program that it meets all of the requirements set out in RCW 74.15.020(2)(o).

3. The secretary of state has no duty to confirm that a host home program is meeting its statutory requirements. A filing under this section does not imply an endorsement by the secretary of state.

4. The secretary of state may adopt rules necessary to carry out its duties under this section.

\[ [2021 c 176 § 5104](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/2021-22/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/Senate/5034-S.SL.pdf?cite=2021%20c%20176%20§%205104); \]

## 74.15.900 - Short title—Purpose—Entitlement not granted—1999 c 267 §§ 10-26.
Sections 10 through 26, chapter 267, Laws of 1999 may be referred to as the homeless youth prevention, protection, and education act, or the HOPE act. Every day many youth in this state seek shelter out on the street. A nurturing nuclear family does not exist for them, and state-sponsored alternatives such as foster homes do not meet the demand and isolate youth, who feel like outsiders in families not their own. The legislature recognizes the need to develop placement alternatives for dependent youth ages sixteen to eighteen, who are living on the street. The HOPE act is an effort to engage youth and provide them access to services through development of life skills in a setting that supports them. Nothing in sections 10 through 26, chapter 267, Laws of 1999 shall constitute an entitlement.

\[ [1999 c 267 § 10](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/1999-00/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/House/1493-S2.SL.pdf?cite=1999%20c%20267%20§%2010); \]

## 74.15.901 - Federal waivers—1999 c 267 §§ 10-26.
1. The department of social and health services shall seek any necessary federal waivers for federal funding of the programs created under sections 10 through 26, chapter 267, Laws of 1999. The department shall pursue federal funding sources for the programs created under sections 10 through 26, chapter 267, Laws of 1999, and report to the legislature any statutory barriers to federal funding.

2. The department of children, youth, and families shall seek any necessary federal waivers for federal funding of the programs created under sections 10 through 26, chapter 267, Laws of 1999. The department shall pursue federal funding sources for the programs created under sections 10 through 26, chapter 267, Laws of 1999, and report to the legislature any statutory barriers to federal funding.

\[ [2017 3rd sp.s. c 6 § 416](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/2017-18/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/House/1661-S2.SL.pdf?cite=2017%203rd%20sp.s.%20c%206%20§%20416); [1999 c 267 § 23](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/1999-00/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/House/1493-S2.SL.pdf?cite=1999%20c%20267%20§%2023); \]

## 74.15.902 - Construction—Chapter applicable to state registered domestic partnerships—2009 c 521.
For the purposes of this chapter, the terms spouse, marriage, marital, husband, wife, widow, widower, next of kin, and family shall be interpreted as applying equally to state registered domestic partnerships or individuals in state registered domestic partnerships as well as to marital relationships and married persons, and references to dissolution of marriage shall apply equally to state registered domestic partnerships that have been terminated, dissolved, or invalidated, to the extent that such interpretation does not conflict with federal law. Where necessary to implement chapter 521, Laws of 2009, gender-specific terms such as husband and wife used in any statute, rule, or other law shall be construed to be gender neutral, and applicable to individuals in state registered domestic partnerships. Nothing in chapter 521, Laws of 2009 shall be construed as creating or requiring the creation of any medical assistance program, as that term is defined in RCW 74.09.010, for state registered domestic partners that is analogous to federal medical assistance programs extended to married persons.

\[ [2009 c 521 § 178](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/2009-10/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/Senate/5688-S2.SL.pdf?cite=2009%20c%20521%20§%20178); \]

## 74.15.903 - Construction—Religious or nonprofit organizations.
Nothing contained in chapter 3, Laws of 2012 shall be construed to alter or affect existing law regarding the manner in which a religious or nonprofit organization may be licensed to and provide adoption, foster care, or other child-placing services under this chapter or chapter 74.13 or 26.33 RCW.

\[ 2012 c 3 § 16 (Referendum Measure No. 74, approved November 6, 2012); \]

