# 44.73 - Legislative gift center.
* [44.73.005 - Findings.](#4473005---findings)
* [44.73.010 - Legislative gift center—Created—Retail sale of products—Governance—Planning.](#4473010---legislative-gift-centercreatedretail-sale-of-productsgovernanceplanning)
* [44.73.015 - Legislative gift center—Selling wine for off-premises consumption—Collection and remittance of all applicable state and local taxes—Consultation with the Washington wine commission.](#4473015---legislative-gift-centerselling-wine-for-off-premises-consumptioncollection-and-remittance-of-all-applicable-state-and-local-taxesconsultation-with-the-washington-wine-commission)
* [44.73.020 - Legislative gift center account.](#4473020---legislative-gift-center-account)
## 44.73.005 - Findings.
The legislature finds that Washington is committed to economic development and supporting the tourism industry, and that economic development is achieved by promoting the state and the goods produced around the state. The legislature further finds that tourism is encouraged providing a memorable experience and an opportunity for visitors to take something back home with them to remind them of this experience. There are many visitors every day to the legislative building, including tourists, school children, and people from around the state visiting the state capitol. These visitors offer an opportunity for the state to showcase its products and history. Therefore, the legislature finds that a gift center in the legislative building would be an appropriate response to this opportunity, and further, that such a gift center could provide a source of revenue to help fund the oral history program and to pay for the restoration and repurchase of historical capitol furnishings.

\[ [2007 c 453 § 1](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/2007-08/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/House/1896-S2.SL.pdf?cite=2007%20c%20453%20§%201); \]

## 44.73.010 - Legislative gift center—Created—Retail sale of products—Governance—Planning.
1. There is created in the legislature a legislative gift center for the retail sale of products bearing the state seal, Washington state souvenirs, other Washington products, and other products as approved. Wholesale purchase of products for sale at the legislative gift center is not subject to competitive bidding.

2. Governance for the legislative gift center shall be under the chief clerk of the house of representatives and the secretary of the senate. They may designate a legislative staff member as the lead staff person to oversee management and operation of the gift shop.

3. The chief clerk of the house of representatives and secretary of the senate shall consult with the department of enterprise services in planning, siting, and maintaining legislative building space for the gift center.

4. Products bearing the "Seal of the State of Washington" as described in Article XVIII, section 1 of the Washington state Constitution and RCW 1.20.080, must be purchased from the secretary of state pursuant to an agreement between the chief clerk of the house of representatives, the secretary of the senate, and the secretary of state.

\[ [2015 c 225 § 97](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/2015-16/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/Senate/5024.SL.pdf?cite=2015%20c%20225%20§%2097); [2007 c 453 § 2](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/2007-08/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/House/1896-S2.SL.pdf?cite=2007%20c%20453%20§%202); \]

## 44.73.015 - Legislative gift center—Selling wine for off-premises consumption—Collection and remittance of all applicable state and local taxes—Consultation with the Washington wine commission.
1. The legislative gift center is authorized to sell at retail for off-premises consumption wine produced in Washington by a licensed domestic winery. Wine sold by the legislative gift center must: (a) Be sold to individuals twenty-one years of age or older; (b) be sold for personal use and not for resale; and (c) have been purchased from a licensed wine distributor or from a manufacturer authorized to distribute wine of its own production.

2. The legislative gift center must collect and remit to the department of revenue all applicable state and local taxes on sales of wine.

3. The legislative gift center must consult with the Washington wine commission to select which Washington wines will be sold. The Washington wine commission must give consideration to award winning wines in assisting the gift center.

\[ [2009 c 228 § 3](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/2009-10/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/House/1415-S.SL.pdf?cite=2009%20c%20228%20§%203); \]

## 44.73.020 - Legislative gift center account.
1. The legislative gift center account is created in the custody of the state treasurer. All moneys received by the gift center from the sale of Washington state souvenirs, other Washington products, and other products as approved shall be deposited in the account. Expenditures from the account may be used only for the operations and maintenance of the gift center, including the purchase of inventory, and for other purposes as provided in this section. Only the chief clerk of the house of representatives and the secretary of the senate, or the lead staff person designated by them to oversee management and operation of the gift shop, may authorize expenditures from the account. The account is subject to allotment procedures under chapter 43.88 RCW, but an appropriation is not required for expenditures.

2. Net profits, after expenses, from the sale of Washington state souvenirs, other Washington products, and products approved by the legislative gift center, shall be deposited as provided in this subsection:

   a. Twenty-five percent in the legislative oral history account in chapter 44.04 RCW (created in *Substitute House Bill No. 1741);

   b. Twenty-five percent in the oral history, state library, and archives account created in **RCW 43.07.380; and

   c. Fifty percent in the capitol furnishings preservation committee account created in RCW 27.48.040.

3. Net profits, after expenses, from the sale of items bearing the state seal by the legislative gift center shall be deposited in the capitol furnishings preservation committee account created in RCW 27.48.040. A full accounting thereof shall be provided to the secretary of state.

4. The legislative gift center may designate special sales, the proceeds of which shall go to an account specified at the time of designation.

\[ [2007 c 453 § 3](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/2007-08/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/House/1896-S2.SL.pdf?cite=2007%20c%20453%20§%203); \]

