# 44.80 - Legislative support services.
* [44.80.010 - Finding—Intent.](#4480010---findingintent)
* [44.80.020 - Definitions.](#4480020---definitions)
* [44.80.030 - Administrative and support services.](#4480030---administrative-and-support-services)
* [44.80.040 - Duties of director.](#4480040---duties-of-director)
* [44.80.050 - Expenses—Vouchers.](#4480050---expensesvouchers)
## 44.80.010 - Finding—Intent.
The legislature finds that state government should be operated in an efficient and effective manner. It is the intent of the legislature to create the office of legislative support services to make effective and efficient use of the public's resources, improve the delivery and quality of services, standardize practices, and achieve cost savings.

\[ [2012 c 113 § 1](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/2011-12/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/House/2705.SL.pdf?cite=2012%20c%20113%20§%201); \]

## 44.80.020 - Definitions.
The definitions in this section apply throughout this chapter unless the context clearly requires otherwise.

1. "Director" means the director of the office of legislative support services employed under RCW 44.80.040.

2. "Legislative agencies" means: The joint legislative audit and review committee, the joint transportation committee, the office of the state actuary, the legislative evaluation and accountability program committee, the office of legislative support services, the *joint legislative systems committee, and the statute law committee.

3. "Office" means the office of legislative support services.

\[ [2012 c 113 § 2](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/2011-12/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/House/2705.SL.pdf?cite=2012%20c%20113%20§%202); \]

## 44.80.030 - Administrative and support services.
1. The office of legislative support services is created to provide administrative and support services to the senate, house of representatives, and legislative agencies. All operations of the office are subject to RCW 44.04.260.

2. The office shall provide support to the senate, the house of representatives, and legislative agencies for facilities operations, asset management, production services, audiovisual needs, the distribution of information about the legislature and the legislative process to the public, and other administrative or support services of the senate, the house of representatives, and legislative agencies authorized by the secretary of the senate and the chief clerk of the house of representatives.

\[ [2012 c 113 § 3](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/2011-12/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/House/2705.SL.pdf?cite=2012%20c%20113%20§%203); \]

## 44.80.040 - Duties of director.
1. The secretary of the senate and the chief clerk of the house of representatives, in consultation with the senate facilities and operations committee and the house executive rules committee, shall employ a director of the office. The director serves at the pleasure of the secretary of the senate and the chief clerk of the house of representatives, who shall fix the director's salary.

2. [Empty]

   a. The director serves as the executive and administrative head of the office.

   b. In accordance with an adopted personnel plan, the director shall employ and fix the compensation for personnel required to carry out the purposes of this chapter.

   c. The director may enter into contracts for: (i) The sale, exchange, or acquisition of equipment, supplies, services, and facilities required to carry out the purposes of this chapter; and (ii) the distribution of legislative information.

\[ [2012 c 113 § 4](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/2011-12/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/House/2705.SL.pdf?cite=2012%20c%20113%20§%204); \]

## 44.80.050 - Expenses—Vouchers.
Subject to RCW 44.04.260, all expenses incurred, including salaries and expenses of employees, shall be paid upon voucher forms as provided and signed by the director. Vouchers may be drawn on funds appropriated by law for the office. The senate and house of representatives may transfer moneys appropriated for legislative expenses to the office.

\[ [2012 c 113 § 5](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/2011-12/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/House/2705.SL.pdf?cite=2012%20c%20113%20§%205); \]

