# 61.10 - Mortgage insurance.
* [61.10.010 - Definitions.](#6110010---definitions)
* [61.10.020 - Condition of residential mortgage transaction—Disclosures—Notices—Harm to borrower—Compliance with federal requirements.](#6110020---condition-of-residential-mortgage-transactiondisclosuresnoticesharm-to-borrowercompliance-with-federal-requirements)
* [61.10.030 - Termination of insurance during term of indebtedness—Exception—Required conditions—Application to residential mortgage transactions—Compliance with federal requirements.](#6110030---termination-of-insurance-during-term-of-indebtednessexceptionrequired-conditionsapplication-to-residential-mortgage-transactionscompliance-with-federal-requirements)
* [61.10.040 - Not required when loan is less than eighty percent of value—Compliance with federal requirements.](#6110040---not-required-when-loan-is-less-than-eighty-percent-of-valuecompliance-with-federal-requirements)
* [61.10.901 - Effective date—1998 c 255.](#6110901---effective-date1998-c-255)
## 61.10.010 - Definitions.
As used in this chapter:

1. "Institutional third party" means the federal national mortgage association, the federal home loan mortgage corporation, the government national mortgage association, and other substantially similar institutions, whether public or private, provided the institutions establish and adhere to rules applicable to the right of cancellation of mortgage insurance, which are the same or substantially the same as those utilized by the institutions named in this subsection.

2. "Mortgage insurance" means insurance, including mortgage guarantee insurance, against financial loss by reason of nonpayment of principal, interest, and other sums agreed to be paid in a residential mortgage transaction.

3. "Residential mortgage transaction" means entering into a loan for personal, family, household, or purchase money purposes that is secured by a deed of trust or mortgage on owner-occupied, one-to-four unit, residential real property located in the state of Washington.

\[ [1998 c 255 § 1](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/1997-98/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/House/2611-S.SL.pdf?cite=1998%20c%20255%20§%201); \]

## 61.10.020 - Condition of residential mortgage transaction—Disclosures—Notices—Harm to borrower—Compliance with federal requirements.
1. If a borrower is required to obtain and maintain mortgage insurance as a condition of entering into a residential mortgage transaction, the lender shall disclose to the borrower whether and under what conditions the borrower has the right to cancel the mortgage insurance in the future. This disclosure shall include:

   a. Any identifying loan or insurance information, or other information, necessary to permit the borrower to communicate with the servicer or lender concerning the private mortgage insurance;

   b. The conditions that are required to be satisfied before the mortgage insurance may be canceled; and

   c. The procedures required to be followed by the borrower to cancel the mortgage insurance.

The disclosure required in this subsection shall be made in writing at the time the transaction is entered into.

2. For residential mortgage transactions with mortgage insurance, the lender, or the person servicing the residential mortgage transaction if it is not the lender, annually shall provide the borrower with:

   a. A notice containing the same information as required to be disclosed under subsection (1) of this section; or

   b. A statement indicating that the borrower may be able to cancel the mortgage insurance and that the borrower may contact the lender or loan servicer at a designated address and phone number to find out whether the insurance can be canceled and the conditions and procedures to effect cancellation.

The notice or statement required by this subsection shall be provided in writing in a clear and conspicuous manner in or with each annual statement of account.

3. The notices and statements required in this section shall be provided without cost to the borrower.

4. Any borrower in a residential mortgage transaction who is harmed by a violation of this section may obtain injunctive relief, may recover from the party who caused such harm by failure to comply with this section up to three times the amount of mortgage insurance premiums wrongly collected, and may recover reasonable attorneys' fees and costs of such action.

5. This section does not apply to any mortgage funded with bond proceeds issued under an indenture requiring mortgage insurance for the life of the loan or to loans insured by the federal housing administration or the veterans administration.

6. Subsection (1) of this section applies to residential mortgage transactions entered into on or after July 1, 1998. Subsection (2) of this section applies to any residential mortgage transaction existing on July 1, 1998, or entered into on or after July 1, 1998.

7. A lender or person servicing a residential mortgage transaction who complies with federal requirements, as now or hereafter enacted, prescribing mortgage insurance disclosures and notifications shall be deemed in compliance with this section.

\[ [1998 c 255 § 2](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/1997-98/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/House/2611-S.SL.pdf?cite=1998%20c%20255%20§%202); \]

## 61.10.030 - Termination of insurance during term of indebtedness—Exception—Required conditions—Application to residential mortgage transactions—Compliance with federal requirements.
1. Except when a statute, regulation, rule, or written guideline promulgated by an institutional third party applicable to a residential mortgage transaction purchased in whole or in part by an institutional third party specifically prohibits cancellation during the term of indebtedness, the lender or servicer of a residential mortgage transaction may not charge or collect future payments from a borrower for mortgage insurance, and the borrower is not obligated to make such payments, if all of the following conditions are satisfied:

   a. The borrower makes a written request to terminate the obligation to make future payments for mortgage insurance;

   b. The residential mortgage transaction is at least two years old;

   c. The outstanding principal balance of the residential loan is not greater than eighty percent of the current fair market value of the property and is:

      i. For loans made for the purchase of the property, less than eighty percent of the lesser of the sales price or the appraised value at the time the transaction is entered into; or

      ii. For all other residential mortgage transactions, less than eighty percent of the appraised value at the time the residential loan transaction was entered into.

The lender or servicer may request that a current appraisal be done to verify the outstanding principal balance is less than eighty percent of the current fair market value of the property; unless otherwise agreed to in writing, the lender or servicer selects the appraiser and splits the cost with the borrower;

   d. The borrower's scheduled payment of monthly installments or principal, interest, and any escrow obligations is current at the time the borrower requests termination of his or her obligation to continue to pay for mortgage insurance, those installments have not been more than thirty days late in the last twelve months, and the borrower has not been assessed more than one late penalty over the past twelve months;

   e. A notice of default has not been recorded against the property as the result of a nonmonetary default in the previous twelve months.

2. This section applies to residential mortgage transactions entered into on or after July 1, 1998.

3. This section does not apply to:

   a. Any residential mortgage transaction that is funded in whole or in part pursuant to authority granted by statute, regulation, or rule that, as a condition of that funding, prohibits or limits termination of payments for mortgage insurance during the term of the indebtedness; or

   b. Any mortgage funded with bond proceeds issued under an indenture requiring mortgage insurance for the life of the loan.

4. If the residential mortgage transaction will be or has been sold in whole or in part to an institutional third party, adherence to the institutional third party's standards for termination of future payments for mortgage insurance shall be deemed in compliance with this section.

5. A lender or person servicing a residential mortgage transaction who complies with federal requirements, as now or hereafter enacted, governing the cancellation of mortgage insurance shall be deemed in compliance with this section.

\[ [1998 c 255 § 3](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/1997-98/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/House/2611-S.SL.pdf?cite=1998%20c%20255%20§%203); \]

## 61.10.040 - Not required when loan is less than eighty percent of value—Compliance with federal requirements.
On or after July 1, 1998, no borrower entering into a residential mortgage transaction in which the principal amount of the loan is less than eighty percent of the fair market value of the property shall be required to obtain mortgage insurance. Fair market value for a purchase money loan is the lesser of the sales price or the appraised value. This section shall not apply to residential mortgage transactions in an amount in excess of the maximum limits established by institutional third parties where the borrower and the lender have agreed in writing to mortgage insurance.

A lender or person servicing a residential mortgage transaction who complies with federal requirements, as now or hereafter enacted, governing the requirement of obtaining mortgage insurance shall be deemed in compliance with this section.

\[ [1998 c 255 § 4](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/1997-98/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/House/2611-S.SL.pdf?cite=1998%20c%20255%20§%204); \]

## 61.10.901 - Effective date—1998 c 255.
This act takes effect July 1, 1998.

\[ [1998 c 255 § 6](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/1997-98/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/House/2611-S.SL.pdf?cite=1998%20c%20255%20§%206); \]

