[wa-law.org](/) > [bill](/bill/) > [2023-24](/bill/2023-24/) > [SB 5001](/bill/2023-24/sb/5001/) > [Passed Legislature](/bill/2023-24/sb/5001/S2.PL/)

# SB 5001 - Public facility districts

[Source](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/2023-24/Pdf/Bills/Senate%20Passed%20Legislature/5001-S2.PL.pdf)

## Section 1
1. [Empty]

    a. The legislative authority of any town or city located in a county with a population of less than one million may create a public facilities district.

    b. The legislative authorities of any contiguous group of towns or cities located in a county or counties each with a population of less than one million may enter an agreement under chapter 39.34 RCW for the creation and joint operation of a public facilities district.

    c. The legislative authority of any town or city, or any contiguous group of towns or cities, located in a county with a population of less than one million and the legislative authority of a contiguous county, or the legislative authority of the county or counties in which the towns or cities are located, may enter into an agreement under chapter 39.34 RCW for the creation and joint operation of a public facilities district.

    d. The legislative authority of a city located in a county with a population greater than one million may create a public facilities district, when the city has a total population of less than one hundred fifteen thousand but greater than eighty thousand and commences construction of a regional center prior to July 1, 2008.

    e. At least three contiguous towns or cities with a combined population of at least one hundred sixty thousand, each of which previously created a public facilities district under (a) of this subsection, may create an additional public facilities district. The previously created districts may continue their full corporate existence and activities notwithstanding the creation and existence of the additional district within the same geographic area.

    f. The legislative authority of two or more contiguous towns or cities or the legislative authority of two or more contiguous towns or cities and the legislative authority of the county or counties in which the towns or cities are located, each of which participated in the creation of a public facilities district under (c) of this subsection, may create an additional public facilities district. Any previously created district may continue its full corporate existence and activities notwithstanding the creation and existence of an additional district within the same geographic area. A public facilities district formed under this subsection (1)(f) must be created prior to July 1, 2026. The creation of a public facilities district under this subsection does not require all of the original participating towns, cities, or counties that created a public facilities district under (c) of this subsection to participate in the formation of the additional public facilities district under this subsection.

2. [Empty]

    a. A public facilities district is coextensive with the boundaries of the city or town or contiguous group of cities or towns that created the district.

    b. A public facilities district created by an agreement between a town or city, or a contiguous group of towns or cities, and a contiguous county or the county in which they are located, is coextensive with the boundaries of the towns or cities, and the boundaries of the county or counties as to the unincorporated areas of the county or counties. The boundaries do not include incorporated towns or cities that are not parties to the agreement for the creation and joint operation of the district.

3. [Empty]

    a. A public facilities district created by a single city or town shall be governed by a board of directors consisting of five members selected as follows: (i) Two members appointed by the legislative authority of the city or town; and (ii) three members appointed by legislative authority based on recommendations from local organizations. The members appointed under (a)(i) of this subsection, shall not be members of the legislative authority of the city or town. The members appointed under (a)(ii) of this subsection, must be based on recommendations received from local organizations that may include, but are not limited to, the local chamber of commerce, local economic development council, and local labor council. The members shall serve four-year terms. Of the initial members, one must be appointed for a one-year term, one must be appointed for a two-year term, one must be appointed for a three-year term, and the remainder must be appointed for four-year terms.

    b. A public facilities district created by a contiguous group of cities and towns must be governed by a board of directors consisting of seven members selected as follows: (i) Three members appointed by the legislative authorities of the cities and towns; and (ii) four members appointed by the legislative authorities of the cities and towns based on recommendations from local organizations. The members appointed under (b)(i) of this subsection shall not be members of the legislative authorities of the cities and towns. The members appointed under (b)(ii) of this subsection, must be based on recommendations received from local organizations that include, but are not limited to, the local chamber of commerce, local economic development council, local labor council, and a neighborhood organization that is directly affected by the location of the regional center in their area. The members of the board of directors must be appointed in accordance with the terms of the agreement under chapter 39.34 RCW for the joint operation of the district and shall serve four-year terms. Of the initial members, one must be appointed for a one-year term, one must be appointed for a two-year term, one must be appointed for a three-year term, and the remainder must be appointed for four-year terms.

    c. A public facilities district created by a town or city, or a contiguous group of towns or cities, and a contiguous county or the county or counties in which they are located, must be governed by a board of directors consisting of seven members selected as follows: (i) Three members appointed by the legislative authorities of the cities, towns, and county; and (ii) four members appointed by the legislative authorities of the cities, towns, and county based on recommendations from local organizations. The members appointed under (c)(i) of this subsection shall not be members of the legislative authorities of the cities, towns, or county. The members appointed under (c)(ii) of this subsection must be based on recommendations received from local organizations that include, but are not limited to, the local chamber of commerce, the local economic development council, the local labor council, and a neighborhood organization that is directly affected by the location of the regional center in their area. The members of the board of directors must be appointed in accordance with the terms of the agreement under chapter 39.34 RCW for the joint operation of the district and shall serve four-year terms. Of the initial members, one must be appointed for a one-year term, one must be appointed for a two‑year term, one must be appointed for a three-year term, and the remainder must be appointed for four-year terms.

    d. [Empty]

        i. A public facilities district created under subsection (1)(e) of this section must provide, in the agreement providing for its creation and operation, that the district must be governed by an odd-numbered board of directors of not more than nine members who are also members of the legislative authorities that created the public facilities district or of the governing boards of the public facilities districts previously created by those legislative authorities, or both.

        ii. A board of directors formed under this subsection must have an equal number of members representing each city or town participating in the public facilities district. If there are unfilled board member positions after each city or town has appointed an equal number of board members, the members so appointed must appoint a number of additional board members necessary to fill any remaining positions. For a board formed under this subsection to submit a proposition to the voters under RCW 82.14.048, a majority of the members representing or appointed by each legislative authority participating in the public facilities district must agree to submit the proposition to the voters.

4. A public facilities district is a municipal corporation, an independent taxing "authority" within the meaning of Article VII, section 1 of the state Constitution, and a "taxing district" within the meaning of Article VII, section 2 of the state Constitution.

5. A public facilities district constitutes a body corporate and possesses all the usual powers of a corporation for public purposes as well as all other powers that may now or hereafter be specifically conferred by statute including, but not limited to, the authority to hire employees, staff, and services, to enter into contracts, and to sue and be sued.

6. A public facilities district may acquire and transfer real and personal property by lease, sublease, purchase, or sale. No direct or collateral attack on any public facilities district purported to be authorized or created in conformance with this chapter may be commenced more than thirty days after creation by the city and/or county legislative authority.

## Section 2
1. [Empty]

    a. A public facilities district is authorized to acquire, construct, own, remodel, maintain, equip, reequip, repair, finance, and operate one or more regional centers. For purposes of this chapter, "regional center" means a convention, conference, or special events center, or any combination of facilities, and related parking facilities, serving a regional population constructed, improved, or rehabilitated after July 25, 1999, at a cost of at least ten million dollars, including debt service. "Regional center" also includes an existing convention, conference, or special events center, and related parking facilities, serving a regional population, that is improved or rehabilitated after July 25, 1999, where the costs of improvement or rehabilitation are at least ten million dollars, including debt service. A "special events center" is a facility, available to the public, used for community events, sporting events, trade shows, and artistic, musical, theatrical, or other cultural exhibitions, presentations, or performances. A regional center is conclusively presumed to serve a regional population if state and local government investment in the construction, improvement, or rehabilitation of the regional center is equal to or greater than ten million dollars.

    b. A public facilities district created under RCW 35.57.010(1)(e):

        i. Is authorized, in addition to the authority granted under (a) of this subsection, to acquire, construct, own, remodel, maintain, equip, reequip, repair, finance, and operate one or more recreational facilities other than a ski area;

        ii. If exercising its authority under (a) or (b)(i) of this subsection, must obtain voter approval to fund each recreational facility or regional center pursuant to RCW 82.14.048(4)(a); and

        iii. Possesses all of the powers with respect to recreational facilities other than a ski area that all public facilities districts possess with respect to regional centers under subsections (3), (4), and (7) of this section.

        iii. Possesses all of the powers with respect to recreational facilities other than a ski area that all public facilities districts possess with respect to regional centers.

    d. A public facilities district created under RCW 35.57.010(1)(f) is authorized, in lieu of the authority granted under (a) of this subsection, to acquire, construct, own, remodel, maintain, equip, reequip, repair, finance, and operate regional aquatics and sports facilities, including the purchase, acquisition, construction, repairing, remodeling, and operation of community pools within the district. Additionally, a public facilities district created under RCW 35.57.010(1)(f) may provide funding for transportation improvements directly associated with facilitating motor vehicle and pedestrian access to regional aquatics and sports facilities, which includes funding for new construction, reconstruction, expansion, and maintenance of pedestrian trails, city streets, county roads, and state highways. However, the transportation improvements must be aligned with applicable state, regional, or local transportation plans.

2. A public facilities district may enter into contracts with any city or town for the purpose of exercising any powers of a community renewal agency under chapter 35.81 RCW.

3. A public facilities district may impose charges and fees for the use of its facilities, and may accept and expend or use gifts, grants, and donations for the purpose of a regional center.

4. A public facilities district may impose charges, fees, and taxes authorized in RCW 35.57.040, and use revenues derived therefrom for the purpose of paying principal and interest payments on bonds issued by the public facilities district to construct a regional center.

5. Notwithstanding the establishment of a career, civil, or merit service system, a public facilities district may contract with a public or private entity for the operation or management of its public facilities.

6. A public facilities district is authorized to use the supplemental alternative public works contracting procedures set forth in chapter 39.10 RCW in connection with the design, construction, reconstruction, remodel, or alteration of any regional center.

7. A city or town in conjunction with any special agency, authority, or other district established by a county or any other governmental agency is authorized to use the supplemental alternative public works contracting procedures set forth in chapter 39.10 RCW in connection with the design, construction, reconstruction, remodel, or alteration of any regional center funded in whole or in part by a public facilities district.

8. Any provision required to be submitted for voter approval under this section may not be submitted for voter approval prior to January 1, 2011.

## Section 3
1. The following definitions apply throughout this section unless the context clearly requires otherwise.

    a. "Distressed public facilities district" means a public facilities district that has defaulted on bond anticipation notes or bonds in excess of forty million dollars on or before April 1, 2012; and

    b. "Anchor jurisdiction" means a city that has entered into an agreement to form a public facilities district under RCW 35.57.010(1)(c) that constitutes a distressed public facilities district under this chapter and in which the largest asset of such public facilities district is located.

2. [Empty]

    a. The governing board of a public facilities district under chapter 36.100 or 35.57 RCW may submit an authorizing proposition to the voters of the district, and if the proposition is approved by a majority of persons voting, impose a sales and use tax in accordance with the terms of this chapter.

    b. In addition to the tax authorized pursuant to (a) of this subsection and in addition to any other authority conferred by law, the legislative authority of an anchor jurisdiction may impose a sales and use tax within the geographical boundaries of the anchor jurisdiction in accordance with the terms of this chapter without submitting an authorizing proposition to the voters of the anchor jurisdiction or the distressed public facilities district.

3. The tax authorized in this section is in addition to any other taxes authorized by law and must be collected from those persons who are taxable by the state under chapters 82.08 and 82.12 RCW upon the occurrence of any taxable event within the public facilities district. The rate of tax may not exceed two-tenths of one percent of the selling price in the case of a sales tax, or value of the article used, in the case of a use tax. A public facilities district formed under RCW 35.57.010(1)(e) may not impose the tax authorized under this section at a rate that exceeds two-tenths of one percent minus the rate of the highest tax authorized by this section that is imposed by any other public facilities district within its boundaries. A public facilities district formed under RCW 35.57.010(1)(f) may impose the tax authorized under this section at a rate of not more than two-tenths of one percent regardless of the tax imposed under this section by any other public facilities district within its boundaries. An anchor jurisdiction may impose the tax authorized by subsection (2)(b) of this section at a rate not to exceed two-tenths of one percent, regardless of whether any other public facilities district (including a distressed public facilities district) within its boundaries imposes the tax authorized by this section or the rate of such tax imposed by the public facilities district. If a public facilities district formed under RCW 35.57.010(1)(e) has imposed a tax under this section and issued or incurred obligations pledging that tax, so long as those obligations are outstanding no other public facilities district within its boundaries may thereafter impose a tax under this section at a rate that would reduce the rate of the tax that was pledged to the repayment of those obligations. A public facilities district that imposes a tax under this section is responsible for the payment of any costs incurred for the purpose of administering the provisions of this section, RCW 35.57.010(1)(e), and 35.57.020(1)(b), including any administrative costs associated with the imposition of the tax under this section incurred by either the department of revenue or local government, or both.

4. [Empty]

    a. Moneys received by a public facilities district from any tax imposed by the public facilities district under the authority of this section must be used for the purpose of providing funds for the costs associated with the financing, refinancing, design, acquisition, construction, equipping, operating, maintaining, remodeling, repairing, and reequipping of its public facilities, and for transportation improvements directly associated with facilitating motor vehicle and pedestrian access to its public facilities to the extent allowed in RCW 35.57.020(1)(d).

    b. Moneys received by an anchor jurisdiction from any tax imposed by the anchor jurisdiction under the authority of this section must be used for the purpose of providing funds for the costs associated with the financing, refinancing, design, acquisition, construction, equipping, operating, maintaining, remodeling, repairing, and reequipping of the public facilities of the distressed public facilities district, and for all litigation, investigation, and related costs and expenses incurred by the anchor jurisdiction toward resolving matters related to the defaults of the distressed public facilities district. To the extent the distressed public facilities district owes money to an anchor jurisdiction, the anchor jurisdiction may apply money from the sales tax imposed under this section to any such obligations. Any sales tax imposed by an anchor jurisdiction under this section must terminate no later than thirty years after it is first imposed.

## Section 4
1. To carry out the purpose of this chapter, a public facilities district may issue general obligation bonds, not to exceed an amount, together with any outstanding nonvoter-approved general obligation indebtedness, equal to one-half of one percent of the value of the taxable property within the district, as the term "value of the taxable property" is defined in RCW 39.36.015. A facilities district additionally may issue general obligation bonds for capital purposes only, together with any outstanding general obligation indebtedness, not to exceed an amount equal to one and one-fourth percent of the value of the taxable property within the district, as the term "value of the taxable property" is defined in RCW 39.36.015, when authorized by the voters of the public facilities district pursuant to Article VIII, section 6 of the state Constitution, and to provide for the retirement thereof by taxes authorized in chapter 165, Laws of 1999.

2. General obligation bonds may be issued with a maturity of up to thirty years, and shall be issued and sold in accordance with the provisions of chapter 39.46 RCW.

3. The general obligation bonds may be payable from the operating revenues of the public facilities district in addition to the tax receipts of the district.

4. A public facilities district formed under RCW 35.57.010(1)(f) may not issue bonds under this section after July 1, 2023, if doing so would cause the scheduled annual principal and interest payments on the aggregate debt issued by the district under this section in any fiscal year to equal or exceed 80 percent of the annual tax revenue that the district projects, on or prior to the date of issuance of the bonds, to collect in such fiscal year under the sales and use tax authorized in RCW 82.14.048. Nothing in this section limits the amount of revenue that a public facilities district may use to make principal and interest payments on the aggregate debt issued by the district under this section.
