# House Bill 1046

[Source](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/2021-22/Xml/Bills/House%20Bills/1046.xml)
## Section 1
> This section modifies existing section [80.28.370](/rcw/80_public_utilities/80.28_gas_electrical_and_water_companies.md). Here is the [modified chapter](rcw/80_public_utilities/80.28_gas_electrical_and_water_companies.md) for context.

The definitions in this section apply throughout this section **,** RCW 80.28.375**, and section 2 of this act** unless the context clearly requires otherwise.

1.

"Community solar project" means **one or more solar energy systems that provide project participants the opportunity to share the costs and benefits associated with the generation of electricity by solar energy systems**.

2. **"Community solar project manager" means the entity identified as having responsibility for managing the operation of a community solar project and, if applicable, for maintaining contact with the investor-owned utility that procures electricity from the community solar project. A community solar project manager may be:**

    a. **An investor-owned utility; or**

    b. **An independent third party.**

3. "Community solar project services" means the provision of electricity generated by a community solar project, or the provision of the financial benefits associated with electricity generated by a community solar project, to multiple project participants, and may include other services associated with the use of the community solar project such as system monitoring and maintenance, warranty provisions, performance guarantees, and customer service.

4. "Electric utility" means a consumer-owned utility or investor-owned utility as those terms are defined in RCW 19.280.020.

5. **"Investor-owned utility" has the same meaning as defined in RCW 19.280.020.**

6. **"Low-income" has the same meaning as defined in RCW 19.405.020.**

7. **"Low-income service provider" includes, but is not limited to, a local community action agency or local community service agency designated by the department of commerce under chapter 43.63A RCW, a local housing authority, a tribal housing authority, a low-income tribal housing program, an affordable housing provider, a food bank, or other nonprofit organization whose primary service supports low-income households.**

8. "Project participant" means a customer who enters into a lease, power purchase agreement, loan, **direct ownership,** or other financial agreement with a community solar company in order to obtain a beneficial interest in a community solar project.

9. "Solar energy system" means any device or combination of devices or elements that rely upon direct sunlight as an energy source for use in the generation of electricity.

10. **"Unsubscribed energy" means the electricity generated by a community solar project that is not subscribed to by a project participant.**


## Section 3
> This section modifies existing section [80.28.375](/rcw/80_public_utilities/80.28_gas_electrical_and_water_companies.md). Here is the [modified chapter](rcw/80_public_utilities/80.28_gas_electrical_and_water_companies.md) for context.

1. No community solar **project manager** may engage in business in this state except in accordance with the provisions of this chapter. Engaging in business as a community solar company includes advertising, soliciting, offering, or entering into an agreement to own a community solar project and provide community solar project services to electric utility customers.

2.  Registration with the commission as a community solar **project manager** must occur on an annual basis. The registration must be on a form prescribed by the commission and contain that information as the commission may by rule require, but must include at a minimum:

    a. The name and address of the community solar **project manager**;

    b. The name and address of the community solar **project manager's** registered agent, if any;

    c. The name, address, and title of each officer or director;

    d. The community solar **project manager's** most current balance sheet;

    e. The community solar **project manager's** latest annual report, if any;

    f. A description of the services the community solar **project manager** offers or intends to offer, including financing models; and

    g. Disclosure of any pending litigation against it.

3. As a precondition to registration, the commission may require the procurement of a performance bond or other mechanism sufficient to cover any advances or deposits the community solar **project manager** may collect from project participants or order that the advances or deposits be held in escrow or trust.

4. The commission may deny registration to any community solar **project manager** that:

    a. Does not provide the information required by this section;

    b. Fails to provide a performance bond or other mechanism, if required;

    c. Does not possess adequate financial resources to provide the proposed service; or

    d. Does not possess adequate technical competency to provide the proposed service.

5. The commission must take action to approve or issue a notice of hearing concerning any application for registration within thirty days after receiving the application. The commission may approve an application with or without a hearing. The commission may deny an application after a hearing.

6. The commission may charge a community solar **project manager** an annual application fee to recover the cost of processing applications for registration under this section.

7. The commission may adopt rules that describe the manner by which it will register a community solar **project manager**, ensure that the terms and conditions of community solar projects or community solar project services comply with the requirements of chapter 36, Laws of 2017 3rd sp. sess., establish the community solar **project manager's** responsibilities for responding to customer complaints and disputes, and adopt annual reporting requirements. In addition to the application fee authorized under subsection (6) of this section, the commission may adopt regulatory fees applicable to community solar companies pursuant to RCW 80.04.080, 80.24.010, and 80.24.020. Such fees may not exceed the cost of ensuring compliance with this chapter.

8. The commission may suspend or revoke a registration upon complaint by any interested party, or upon the commission's own motion after notice and opportunity for hearing, when it finds that a registered community solar **project manager** or its agent has violated this chapter or the rules of the commission, or that the community solar **project manager** or its agent has been found by a court or governmental agency to have violated the laws of a state or the United States.

9. For the purpose of ensuring compliance with this chapter, the commission may issue penalties against community solar **project managers** for violations of this chapter as provided for public service companies pursuant to chapter 80.04 RCW.

10. Upon request of the commission, a community solar **project manager** registered under this section must provide information about its community solar projects or community solar project services.

11. A violation of this section constitutes an unfair or deceptive act in trade or commerce in violation of chapter 19.86 RCW, the consumer protection act. Acts in violation of chapter 36, Laws of 2017 3rd sp. sess. are not reasonable in relation to the development and preservation of business, and constitute matters vitally affecting the public interest for the purpose of applying the consumer protection act, chapter 19.86 RCW.

12. For the purposes of RCW 19.86.170, actions or transactions of a community solar **project manager** may not be deemed otherwise permitted, prohibited, or regulated by the commission.

