# 35A.66 - Health and safety—Alcohol.
* [35A.66.010 - Alcoholism—Standards for institutions.](#35a66010---alcoholismstandards-for-institutions)
* [35A.66.020 - Liquors, local option on sale of—Enforcement of state laws, sharing proceeds of liquor profits and excise tax.](#35a66020---liquors-local-option-on-sale-ofenforcement-of-state-laws-sharing-proceeds-of-liquor-profits-and-excise-tax)
## 35A.66.010 - Alcoholism—Standards for institutions.
In addition to regulating the use of alcoholic beverages, a code city may exercise the powers relating to prescribing standards for institutions for treating alcoholism as authorized by RCW 71.12.550.

\[ [1967 ex.s. c 119 § 35A.66.010](https://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1967ex1c119.pdf?cite=1967%20ex.s.%20c%20119%20§%2035A.66.010); \]

## 35A.66.020 - Liquors, local option on sale of—Enforcement of state laws, sharing proceeds of liquor profits and excise tax.
The qualified electors of any code city may petition for an election upon the question of whether the sale of liquor shall be permitted within the boundaries of such city as provided by chapter 66.40 RCW, and shall be governed by the procedure therein, and may regulate music, dancing and entertainment as authorized by RCW 66.28.080: PROVIDED, That every code city shall enforce state laws relating to the investigation and prosecution of all violations of Title 66 RCW relating to control of alcoholic beverages and shall be entitled to retain the fines collected therefrom as therein provided. Every code city shall also share in the allocation and distribution of liquor profits and excise as provided in RCW 82.08.170, 66.08.190, and 66.08.210, and make reports of seizure as required by RCW 66.32.090, and otherwise regulate by ordinances not in conflict with state law or *liquor board regulations.

\[ [1967 ex.s. c 119 § 35A.66.020](https://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1967ex1c119.pdf?cite=1967%20ex.s.%20c%20119%20§%2035A.66.020); \]

