# 71.20 - Local funds for community services.
* [71.20.100 - Expenditures of county funds subject to county fiscal laws.](#7120100---expenditures-of-county-funds-subject-to-county-fiscal-laws)
* [71.20.110 - Tax levy directed—Allocation of funds for federal matching funds purposes.](#7120110---tax-levy-directedallocation-of-funds-for-federal-matching-funds-purposes)
## 71.20.100 - Expenditures of county funds subject to county fiscal laws.
Expenditures of county funds under this chapter shall be subject to the provisions of chapter 36.40 RCW and other statutes relating to expenditures by counties.

\[ [1967 ex.s. c 110 § 10](http://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1967ex1c110.pdf?cite=1967%20ex.s.%20c%20110%20§%2010); \]

## **71.20.110 - Tax levy directed—Allocation of funds for federal matching funds purposes.**
1. [Empty]

    a. In order to provide additional funds for the coordination and provision of community services for persons with developmental disabilities or mental health services, the county governing authority of each county in the state must  levy annually a tax in a sum equal to the amount which would be raised by  two and one-half cents per thousand dollars of assessed value against the taxable property in the county to be used for such purposes.

    b. **The levy required in this section must be:**

        i. **Imposed by the legislative authority of the county as a separate levy, independent of the regular property tax levy authorized in RCW 84.52.043(1)(b); or**

        ii. **Imposed by the legislative authority of the county as part of its levy authorized in RCW 84.52.043(1)(b).**

2. **All** or part of the funds collected from the tax levied for the purposes of this section may be transferred to the state of Washington, department of social and health services, for the purpose of obtaining federal matching funds to provide and coordinate community services for persons with developmental disabilities and mental health services. In the event a county elects to transfer such tax funds to the state for this purpose, the state must grant these moneys and the additional funds received as matching funds to service-providing community agencies or community boards in the county which has made such transfer, pursuant to the plan approved by the county, as provided by chapters 71.24 and 71.28 RCW and by chapter 71A.14 RCW, all as now or hereafter amended.
