# 69.06 - Food and beverage establishment workers' permits.
* [69.06.010 - Food and beverage service worker's permit—Filing, duration—Minimum training requirements.](#6906010---food-and-beverage-service-workers-permitfiling-durationminimum-training-requirements)
* [69.06.020 - Permit exclusive and valid throughout state—Fee.](#6906020---permit-exclusive-and-valid-throughout-statefee)
* [69.06.030 - Diseased persons—May not work—Employer may not hire.](#6906030---diseased-personsmay-not-workemployer-may-not-hire)
* [69.06.040 - Application of chapter to retail food establishments.](#6906040---application-of-chapter-to-retail-food-establishments)
* [69.06.045 - Application of chapter to temporary food service establishments.](#6906045---application-of-chapter-to-temporary-food-service-establishments)
* [69.06.050 - Permit to be secured within fourteen days from time of employment.](#6906050---permit-to-be-secured-within-fourteen-days-from-time-of-employment)
* [69.06.060 - Penalty.](#6906060---penalty)
* [69.06.070 - Limited duty permit.](#6906070---limited-duty-permit)
* [69.06.080 - Chapter not applicable to persons who meet requirements of RCW  70.128.250.](#6906080---chapter-not-applicable-to-persons-who-meet-requirements-of-rcw--70128250)
## 69.06.010 - Food and beverage service worker's permit—Filing, duration—Minimum training requirements.
It shall be unlawful for any person to be employed in the handling of unwrapped or unpackaged food unless he or she shall furnish and place on file with the person in charge of such establishment, a food and beverage service worker's permit, as prescribed by the state board of health. Such permit shall be kept on file by the employer or kept by the employee on his or her person and open for inspection at all reasonable hours by authorized public health officials. Such permit shall be returned to the employee upon termination of employment. Initial permits, including limited duty permits, shall be valid for two years from the date of issuance. Subsequent renewal permits shall be valid for three years from the date of issuance, except an employee may be granted a renewal permit that is valid for five years from the date of issuance if the employee demonstrates that he or she has obtained additional food safety training prior to renewal of the permit. Rules establishing minimum training requirements must be adopted by the state board of health and developed by the department of health in conjunction with local health jurisdictions and representatives of the food service industry.

\[ [1998 c 136 § 1](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/1997-98/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/House/1867-S.SL.pdf?cite=1998%20c%20136%20§%201); [1987 c 223 § 5](http://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1987c223.pdf?cite=1987%20c%20223%20§%205); [1957 c 197 § 1](http://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1957c197.pdf?cite=1957%20c%20197%20§%201); \]

## 69.06.020 - Permit exclusive and valid throughout state—Fee.
The permit provided in RCW 69.06.010 or 69.06.070 shall be valid in every city, town and county in the state, for the period for which it is issued, and no other health certificate shall be required of such employees by any municipal corporation or political subdivision of the state. The cost of the permit shall be uniform throughout the state and shall be in that amount set by the state board of health. The cost of the permit shall reflect actual costs of food worker training and education, administration of the program, and testing of applicants. The state board of health shall periodically review the costs associated with the permit program and adjust the fee accordingly. The board shall also ensure that the fee is not set at an amount that would prohibit low-income persons from obtaining permits.

\[ [1998 c 136 § 3](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/1997-98/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/House/1867-S.SL.pdf?cite=1998%20c%20136%20§%203); [1987 c 223 § 6](http://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1987c223.pdf?cite=1987%20c%20223%20§%206); [1957 c 197 § 2](http://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1957c197.pdf?cite=1957%20c%20197%20§%202); \]

## 69.06.030 - Diseased persons—May not work—Employer may not hire.
It shall be unlawful for any person afflicted with any contagious or infectious disease that may be transmitted by food or beverage to work in or about any place where unwrapped or unpackaged food and/or beverage products are prepared or sold, or offered for sale for human consumption and it shall be unlawful for any person knowingly to employ a person so afflicted. Nothing in this section eliminates any authority or requirement to control or suppress communicable diseases pursuant to chapter 70.05 RCW and *RCW 43.20.050(2)(e).

\[ [1998 c 136 § 4](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/1997-98/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/House/1867-S.SL.pdf?cite=1998%20c%20136%20§%204); [1957 c 197 § 3](http://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1957c197.pdf?cite=1957%20c%20197%20§%203); \]

## 69.06.040 - Application of chapter to retail food establishments.
This chapter shall apply to any retail establishment engaged in the business of food handling or food service.

\[ [1987 c 223 § 7](http://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1987c223.pdf?cite=1987%20c%20223%20§%207); [1957 c 197 § 4](http://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1957c197.pdf?cite=1957%20c%20197%20§%204); \]

## 69.06.045 - Application of chapter to temporary food service establishments.
As used in this section, "temporary food service establishment" means a food service establishment operating at a fixed location for a period of time of not more than twenty-one consecutive days in conjunction with a single event or celebration. This chapter applies to temporary food service establishments with the following exceptions:

1. Only the operator or person in charge of a temporary food service establishment shall be required to secure a food and beverage service workers' permit; and

2. The operator or person in charge of a temporary food service establishment shall secure a valid food and beverage service workers' permit before commencing the food handling operation.

\[ [1987 c 223 § 8](http://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1987c223.pdf?cite=1987%20c%20223%20§%208); \]

## 69.06.050 - Permit to be secured within fourteen days from time of employment.
Individuals under this chapter must obtain a food and beverage service workers' permit within fourteen days from commencement of employment. Individuals under this chapter may work for up to fourteen calendar days without a food and beverage service workers' permit, provided that they receive information or training regarding safe food handling practices from the employer prior to commencement of employment. Documentation that the information or training has been provided to the individual must be kept on file by the employer.

\[ [1998 c 136 § 5](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/1997-98/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/House/1867-S.SL.pdf?cite=1998%20c%20136%20§%205); [1957 c 197 § 5](http://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1957c197.pdf?cite=1957%20c%20197%20§%205); \]

## 69.06.060 - Penalty.
Any violation of the provisions of this chapter shall be a misdemeanor.

\[ [1957 c 197 § 6](http://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1957c197.pdf?cite=1957%20c%20197%20§%206); \]

## 69.06.070 - Limited duty permit.
The local health officer may issue a limited duty permit when necessary to reasonably accommodate a person with a disability. The limited duty permit must specify the activities that the permit holder may perform, and must include only activities having low public health risk.

\[ [1998 c 136 § 2](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/1997-98/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/House/1867-S.SL.pdf?cite=1998%20c%20136%20§%202); \]

## 69.06.080 - Chapter not applicable to persons who meet requirements of RCW  70.128.250.
Except for the food safety training standards adopted by the state board of health under RCW 69.06.010, the provisions of this chapter do not apply to persons who work in adult family homes and successfully complete training and continuing education as required by RCW 70.128.250.

\[ [2005 c 505 § 7](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/2005-06/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/House/1591-S.SL.pdf?cite=2005%20c%20505%20§%207); \]

