# 69.43 - Precursor drugs.
* [69.43.010 - Report to pharmacy quality assurance commission—List of substances—Modification of list—Identification of purchasers—Report of transactions—Penalties.](#6943010---report-to-pharmacy-quality-assurance-commissionlist-of-substancesmodification-of-listidentification-of-purchasersreport-of-transactionspenalties)
* [69.43.020 - Receipt of substance from source outside state—Report—Penalty.](#6943020---receipt-of-substance-from-source-outside-statereportpenalty)
* [69.43.030 - Exemptions.](#6943030---exemptions)
* [69.43.035 - Suspicious transactions—Report—Penalty.](#6943035---suspicious-transactionsreportpenalty)
* [69.43.040 - Reporting form.](#6943040---reporting-form)
* [69.43.043 - Recordkeeping requirements—Penalty.](#6943043---recordkeeping-requirementspenalty)
* [69.43.048 - Reporting and recordkeeping requirements—Submission of computer readable data, copies of federal reports.](#6943048---reporting-and-recordkeeping-requirementssubmission-of-computer-readable-data-copies-of-federal-reports)
* [69.43.050 - Rules.](#6943050---rules)
* [69.43.060 - Theft—Missing quantity—Reporting.](#6943060---theftmissing-quantityreporting)
* [69.43.070 - Sale, transfer, or furnishing of substance for unlawful purpose—Receipt of substance with intent to use unlawfully—Class B felony.](#6943070---sale-transfer-or-furnishing-of-substance-for-unlawful-purposereceipt-of-substance-with-intent-to-use-unlawfullyclass-b-felony)
* [69.43.080 - False statement in report or record—Class C felony.](#6943080---false-statement-in-report-or-recordclass-c-felony)
* [69.43.090 - Permit to sell, transfer, furnish, or receive substance—Exemptions—Application for permit—Fee—Renewal—Penalty.](#6943090---permit-to-sell-transfer-furnish-or-receive-substanceexemptionsapplication-for-permitfeerenewalpenalty)
* [69.43.100 - Refusal, suspension, or revocation of a manufacturer's or wholesaler's permit.](#6943100---refusal-suspension-or-revocation-of-a-manufacturers-or-wholesalers-permit)
* [69.43.105 - Ephedrine, pseudoephedrine, phenylpropanolamine—Sales restrictions—Record of transaction—Exceptions—Penalty.](#6943105---ephedrine-pseudoephedrine-phenylpropanolaminesales-restrictionsrecord-of-transactionexceptionspenalty)
* [69.43.110 - Ephedrine, pseudoephedrine, phenylpropanolamine—Sales restrictions—Electronic sales tracking system—Penalty.](#6943110---ephedrine-pseudoephedrine-phenylpropanolaminesales-restrictionselectronic-sales-tracking-systempenalty)
* [69.43.120 - Ephedrine, pseudoephedrine, phenylpropanolamine—Possession of more than fifteen grams—Penalty—Exceptions.](#6943120---ephedrine-pseudoephedrine-phenylpropanolaminepossession-of-more-than-fifteen-gramspenaltyexceptions)
* [69.43.130 - Exemptions—Pediatric products—Products exempted by the pharmacy quality assurance commission.](#6943130---exemptionspediatric-productsproducts-exempted-by-the-pharmacy-quality-assurance-commission)
* [69.43.135 - Iodine, methylsulfonylmethane—Sales restrictions—Recording of transactions—Penalties.](#6943135---iodine-methylsulfonylmethanesales-restrictionsrecording-of-transactionspenalties)
* [69.43.140 - Civil penalty—Pharmacy quality assurance commission waiver.](#6943140---civil-penaltypharmacy-quality-assurance-commission-waiver)
* [69.43.150 - Application of chapter to local government.](#6943150---application-of-chapter-to-local-government)
* [69.43.160 - Ephedrine, pseudoephedrine, phenylpropanolamine—Methods to prevent sales violations—Department of health preparation of sign summarizing prohibitions.](#6943160---ephedrine-pseudoephedrine-phenylpropanolaminemethods-to-prevent-sales-violationsdepartment-of-health-preparation-of-sign-summarizing-prohibitions)
* [69.43.165 - Ephedrine, pseudoephedrine, phenylpropanolamine—Electronic sales tracking system—Pharmacy quality assurance commission authority to adopt rules.](#6943165---ephedrine-pseudoephedrine-phenylpropanolamineelectronic-sales-tracking-systempharmacy-quality-assurance-commission-authority-to-adopt-rules)
* [69.43.168 - Pharmacy, shopkeeper, or itinerant vendor—Electronic sales tracking system—Liability.](#6943168---pharmacy-shopkeeper-or-itinerant-vendorelectronic-sales-tracking-systemliability)
* [69.43.180 - Expansion of log requirements—Petition by law enforcement.](#6943180---expansion-of-log-requirementspetition-by-law-enforcement)
* [69.43.190 - Products found at methamphetamine sites—Report.](#6943190---products-found-at-methamphetamine-sitesreport)
## 69.43.010 - Report to pharmacy quality assurance commission—List of substances—Modification of list—Identification of purchasers—Report of transactions—Penalties.
1. A report to the pharmacy quality assurance commission shall be submitted in accordance with this chapter by a manufacturer, wholesaler, retailer, or other person who sells, transfers, or otherwise furnishes to any person any of the following substances or their salts or isomers:

    a.  Anthranilic acid;

    b.  Barbituric acid;

    c.  Chlorephedrine;

    d.  Diethyl malonate;

    e.  D-lysergic acid;

    f.  Ephedrine;

    g.  Ergotamine tartrate;

    h.  Ethylamine;

    i.  Ethyl malonate;

    j.  Ethylephedrine;

    k.  Lead acetate;

    l.  Malonic acid;

    m.  Methylamine;

    n.  Methylformamide;

    o.  Methylephedrine;

    p.  Methylpseudoephedrine;

    q.  N-acetylanthranilic acid;

    r.  Norpseudoephedrine;

    s.  Phenylacetic acid;

    t.  Phenylpropanolamine;

    u.  Piperidine;

    v.  Pseudoephedrine; and

    w.  Pyrrolidine.

2. The pharmacy quality assurance commission shall administer this chapter and may, by rule adopted pursuant to chapter 34.05 RCW, add a substance to or remove a substance from the list in subsection (1) of this section. In determining whether to add or remove a substance, the commission shall consider the following:

    a.  The likelihood that the substance is useable as a precursor in the illegal production of a controlled substance as defined in chapter 69.50 RCW;

    b.  The availability of the substance;

    c.  The relative appropriateness of including the substance in this chapter or in chapter 69.50 RCW; and

    d.  The extent and nature of legitimate uses for the substance.

3. [Empty]

    a.  Any manufacturer, wholesaler, retailer, or other person shall, before selling, transferring, or otherwise furnishing any substance specified in subsection (1) of this section to any person, require proper identification from the purchaser.

    b.  For the purposes of this subsection, "proper identification" means:

        i.  A motor vehicle operator's license or other official state-issued identification of the purchaser containing a photograph of the purchaser, and includes the residential or mailing address of the purchaser, other than a post office box number;

        ii.  The motor vehicle license number of any motor vehicle owned or operated by the purchaser;

        iii.  A letter of authorization from any business for which any substance specified in subsection (1) of this section is being furnished, which includes the business license number and address of the business;

        iv.  A description of how the substance is to be used; and

        v.  The signature of the purchaser.

The person selling, transferring, or otherwise furnishing any substance specified in subsection (1) of this section shall affix his or her signature as a witness to the signature and identification of the purchaser.

    c.  A violation of or a failure to comply with this subsection is a misdemeanor.

4. Any manufacturer, wholesaler, retailer, or other person who sells, transfers, or otherwise furnishes the substance specified in subsection (1) of this section to any person shall, not less than twenty-one days before delivery of the substance, submit a report of the transaction, which includes the identification information specified in subsection (3) of this section to the pharmacy quality assurance commission. However, the pharmacy quality assurance commission may authorize the submission of the reports on a monthly basis with respect to repeated, regular transactions between the furnisher and the recipient involving the same substance if the pharmacy quality assurance commission determines that either of the following exist:

    a.  A pattern of regular supply of the substance exists between the manufacturer, wholesaler, retailer, or other person who sells, transfers, or otherwise furnishes such substance and the recipient of the substance; or

    b.  The recipient has established a record of using the substance for lawful purposes.

5. Any person specified in subsection (4) of this section who does not submit a report as required by subsection (4) of this section is guilty of a gross misdemeanor.

\[ [2013 c 19 § 64](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/2013-14/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/House/1609.SL.pdf?cite=2013%20c%2019%20§%2064); [2001 c 96 § 2](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/2001-02/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/Senate/5017-S.SL.pdf?cite=2001%20c%2096%20§%202); [1998 c 245 § 107](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/1997-98/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/Senate/6219.SL.pdf?cite=1998%20c%20245%20§%20107); [1988 c 147 § 1](http://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1988c147.pdf?cite=1988%20c%20147%20§%201); \]

## 69.43.020 - Receipt of substance from source outside state—Report—Penalty.
1. Any manufacturer, wholesaler, retailer, or other person who receives from a source outside of this state any substance specified in RCW 69.43.010(1) shall submit a report of such transaction to the pharmacy quality assurance commission under rules adopted by the commission.

2. Any person specified in subsection (1) of this section who does not submit a report as required by subsection (1) of this section is guilty of a gross misdemeanor.

\[ [2013 c 19 § 65](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/2013-14/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/House/1609.SL.pdf?cite=2013%20c%2019%20§%2065); [2001 c 96 § 3](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/2001-02/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/Senate/5017-S.SL.pdf?cite=2001%20c%2096%20§%203); [1988 c 147 § 2](http://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1988c147.pdf?cite=1988%20c%20147%20§%202); \]

## 69.43.030 - Exemptions.
RCW 69.43.010 and 69.43.020 do not apply to any of the following:

1. Any pharmacist or other authorized person who sells or furnishes a substance upon the prescription of a practitioner, as defined in chapter 69.41 RCW;

2. Any practitioner who administers or furnishes a substance to his or her patients;

3. Any manufacturer or wholesaler licensed by the pharmacy quality assurance commission who sells, transfers, or otherwise furnishes a substance to a licensed pharmacy or practitioner;

4. Any sale, transfer, furnishing, or receipt of any drug that contains ephedrine, phenylpropanolamine, or pseudoephedrine, or of any cosmetic that contains a substance specified in RCW 69.43.010(1), if such drug or cosmetic is lawfully sold, transferred, or furnished, over the counter without a prescription under chapter 69.04 or 69.41 RCW.

\[ [2013 c 19 § 66](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/2013-14/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/House/1609.SL.pdf?cite=2013%20c%2019%20§%2066); [1988 c 147 § 3](http://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1988c147.pdf?cite=1988%20c%20147%20§%203); \]

## 69.43.035 - Suspicious transactions—Report—Penalty.
1. Any manufacturer or wholesaler who sells, transfers, or otherwise furnishes any substance specified in RCW 69.43.010(1) to any person in a suspicious transaction shall report the transaction in writing to the pharmacy quality assurance commission.

2. Any person specified in subsection (1) of this section who does not submit a report as required by subsection (1) of this section is guilty of a gross misdemeanor.

3. For the purposes of this section, "suspicious transaction" means a sale or transfer to which any of the following applies:

    a.  The circumstances of the sale or transfer would lead a reasonable person to believe that the substance is likely to be used for the purpose of unlawfully manufacturing a controlled substance under chapter 69.50 RCW, based on such factors as the amount involved, the method of payment, the method of delivery, and any past dealings with any participant in the transaction. The pharmacy quality assurance commission shall adopt by rule criteria for determining whether a transaction is suspicious, taking into consideration the recommendations in appendix A of the report to the United States attorney general by the suspicious orders task force under the federal comprehensive methamphetamine control act of 1996.

    b.  The transaction involves payment for any substance specified in RCW 69.43.010(1) in cash or money orders in a total amount of more than two hundred dollars.

4. The pharmacy quality assurance commission shall transmit to the department of revenue a copy of each report of a suspicious transaction that it receives under this section.

\[ [2013 c 19 § 67](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/2013-14/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/House/1609.SL.pdf?cite=2013%20c%2019%20§%2067); [2004 c 52 § 6](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/2003-04/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/Senate/6478-S.SL.pdf?cite=2004%20c%2052%20§%206); [2001 c 96 § 4](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/2001-02/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/Senate/5017-S.SL.pdf?cite=2001%20c%2096%20§%204); \]

## 69.43.040 - Reporting form.
1. The department of health, in accordance with rules developed by the pharmacy quality assurance commission shall provide a common reporting form for the substances in RCW 69.43.010 that contains at least the following information:

    a.  Name of the substance;

    b.  Quantity of the substance sold, transferred, or furnished;

    c.  The date the substance was sold, transferred, or furnished;

    d.  The name and address of the person buying or receiving the substance; and

    e.  The name and address of the manufacturer, wholesaler, retailer, or other person selling, transferring, or furnishing the substance.

2. Monthly reports authorized under RCW 69.43.010(4) may be computer-generated in accordance with rules adopted by the department.

\[ [2013 c 19 § 68](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/2013-14/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/House/1609.SL.pdf?cite=2013%20c%2019%20§%2068); [2001 c 96 § 7](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/2001-02/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/Senate/5017-S.SL.pdf?cite=2001%20c%2096%20§%207); [1989 1st ex.s. c 9 § 441](http://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1989ex1c9.pdf?cite=1989%201st%20ex.s.%20c%209%20§%20441); [1988 c 147 § 4](http://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1988c147.pdf?cite=1988%20c%20147%20§%204); \]

## 69.43.043 - Recordkeeping requirements—Penalty.
1. Any manufacturer or wholesaler who sells, transfers, or otherwise furnishes any substance specified in RCW 69.43.010(1) to any person shall maintain a record of each such sale or transfer. The records must contain:

    a.  The name of the substance;

    b.  The quantity of the substance sold, transferred, or furnished;

    c.  The date the substance was sold, transferred, or furnished;

    d.  The name and address of the person buying or receiving the substance; and

    e.  The method of and amount of payment for the substance.

2. The records of sales and transfers required by this section shall be available for inspection by the pharmacy quality assurance commission and its authorized representatives and shall be maintained for two years.

3. A violation of this section is a gross misdemeanor.

\[ [2013 c 19 § 69](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/2013-14/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/House/1609.SL.pdf?cite=2013%20c%2019%20§%2069); [2001 c 96 § 5](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/2001-02/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/Senate/5017-S.SL.pdf?cite=2001%20c%2096%20§%205); \]

## 69.43.048 - Reporting and recordkeeping requirements—Submission of computer readable data, copies of federal reports.
A manufacturer, wholesaler, retailer, or other person who sells, transfers, or otherwise furnishes any substance specified in RCW 69.43.010(1) and who is subject to the reporting or recordkeeping requirements of this chapter may satisfy the requirements by submitting to the pharmacy quality assurance commission, and its authorized representatives:

1. Computer readable data from which all of the required information may be readily derived; or

2. Copies of reports that are filed under federal law that contain all of the information required by the particular reporting or recordkeeping requirement of this chapter which it is submitted to satisfy.

\[ [2013 c 19 § 70](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/2013-14/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/House/1609.SL.pdf?cite=2013%20c%2019%20§%2070); [2001 c 96 § 6](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/2001-02/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/Senate/5017-S.SL.pdf?cite=2001%20c%2096%20§%206); \]

## 69.43.050 - Rules.
1. The pharmacy quality assurance commission may adopt all rules necessary to carry out this chapter.

2. Notwithstanding subsection (1) of this section, the department of health may adopt rules necessary for the administration of this chapter.

\[ [2013 c 19 § 71](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/2013-14/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/House/1609.SL.pdf?cite=2013%20c%2019%20§%2071); [1989 1st ex.s. c 9 § 442](http://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1989ex1c9.pdf?cite=1989%201st%20ex.s.%20c%209%20§%20442); [1988 c 147 § 5](http://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1988c147.pdf?cite=1988%20c%20147%20§%205); \]

## 69.43.060 - Theft—Missing quantity—Reporting.
1. The theft or loss of any substance under RCW 69.43.010 discovered by any person regulated by this chapter shall be reported to the pharmacy quality assurance commission within seven days after such discovery.

2. Any difference between the quantity of any substance under RCW 69.43.010 received and the quantity shipped shall be reported to the pharmacy quality assurance commission within seven days of the receipt of actual knowledge of the discrepancy. When applicable, any report made pursuant to this subsection shall also include the name of any common carrier or person who transported the substance and the date of shipment of the substance.

\[ [2013 c 19 § 72](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/2013-14/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/House/1609.SL.pdf?cite=2013%20c%2019%20§%2072); [1988 c 147 § 6](http://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1988c147.pdf?cite=1988%20c%20147%20§%206); \]

## 69.43.070 - Sale, transfer, or furnishing of substance for unlawful purpose—Receipt of substance with intent to use unlawfully—Class B felony.
1. Any manufacturer, wholesaler, retailer, or other person who sells, transfers, or otherwise furnishes any substance listed in RCW 69.43.010 with knowledge or the intent that the recipient will use the substance unlawfully to manufacture a controlled substance under chapter 69.50 RCW is guilty of a class B felony under chapter 9A.20 RCW.

2. Any person who receives any substance listed in RCW 69.43.010 with intent to use the substance unlawfully to manufacture a controlled substance under chapter 69.50 RCW is guilty of a class B felony under chapter 9A.20 RCW.

\[ [1988 c 147 § 7](http://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1988c147.pdf?cite=1988%20c%20147%20§%207); \]

## 69.43.080 - False statement in report or record—Class C felony.
It is unlawful for any person knowingly to make a false statement in connection with any report or record required under this chapter. A violation of this section is a class C felony under chapter 9A.20 RCW.

\[ [1988 c 147 § 8](http://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1988c147.pdf?cite=1988%20c%20147%20§%208); \]

## 69.43.090 - Permit to sell, transfer, furnish, or receive substance—Exemptions—Application for permit—Fee—Renewal—Penalty.
1. Any manufacturer, wholesaler, retailer, or other person who sells, transfers, or otherwise furnishes any substance specified in RCW 69.43.010 to any person or who receives from a source outside of the state any substance specified in RCW 69.43.010 shall obtain a permit for the conduct of that business from the pharmacy quality assurance commission. However, a permit shall not be required of any manufacturer, wholesaler, retailer, or other person for the sale, transfer, furnishing, or receipt of any drug that contains ephedrine, phenylpropanolamine, or pseudoephedrine, or of any cosmetic that contains a substance specified in RCW 69.43.010(1), if such drug or cosmetic is lawfully sold, transferred, or furnished over the counter without a prescription or by a prescription under chapter 69.04 or 69.41 RCW.

2. Applications for permits shall be filed with the department in writing and signed by the applicant, and shall set forth the name of the applicant, the business in which the applicant is engaged, the business address of the applicant, and a full description of any substance sold, transferred, or otherwise furnished, or received.

3. The commission may grant permits on forms prescribed by it. The permits shall be effective for not more than one year from the date of issuance.

4. Each applicant shall pay at the time of filing an application for a permit a fee determined by the department.

5. A permit granted under this chapter may be renewed on a date to be determined by the commission, and annually thereafter, upon the filing of a renewal application and the payment of a permit renewal fee determined by the department.

6. Permit fees charged by the department shall not exceed the costs incurred by the department in administering this chapter.

7. Selling, transferring, or otherwise furnishing, or receiving any substance specified in RCW 69.43.010 without a required permit, is a gross misdemeanor.

\[ [2013 c 19 § 73](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/2013-14/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/House/1609.SL.pdf?cite=2013%20c%2019%20§%2073); [2001 c 96 § 8](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/2001-02/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/Senate/5017-S.SL.pdf?cite=2001%20c%2096%20§%208); [1989 1st ex.s. c 9 § 443](http://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1989ex1c9.pdf?cite=1989%201st%20ex.s.%20c%209%20§%20443); [1988 c 147 § 9](http://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1988c147.pdf?cite=1988%20c%20147%20§%209); \]

## 69.43.100 - Refusal, suspension, or revocation of a manufacturer's or wholesaler's permit.
The pharmacy quality assurance commission shall have the power to refuse, suspend, or revoke the permit of any manufacturer or wholesaler upon proof that:

1. The permit was procured through fraud, misrepresentation, or deceit;

2. The permittee has violated or has permitted any employee to violate any of the laws of this state relating to drugs, controlled substances, cosmetics, or nonprescription drugs, or has violated any of the rules and regulations of the pharmacy quality assurance commission.

\[ [2013 c 19 § 74](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/2013-14/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/House/1609.SL.pdf?cite=2013%20c%2019%20§%2074); [1988 c 147 § 10](http://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1988c147.pdf?cite=1988%20c%20147%20§%2010); \]

## 69.43.105 - Ephedrine, pseudoephedrine, phenylpropanolamine—Sales restrictions—Record of transaction—Exceptions—Penalty.
1. For purposes of this section, "traditional Chinese herbal practitioner" means a person who is certified as a diplomate in Chinese herbology from the national certification commission for acupuncture and oriental medicine or who has received a certificate in Chinese herbology from a school accredited by the accreditation council on acupuncture and oriental medicine.

2. A pharmacy licensed by, or shopkeeper or itinerant vendor registered with, the department of health under chapter 18.64 RCW, or an employee thereof, a practitioner as defined in RCW 18.64.011, or a traditional Chinese herbal practitioner may not knowingly sell, transfer, or otherwise furnish to any person a product at retail that he or she knows to contain any detectable quantity of ephedrine, pseudoephedrine, or phenylpropanolamine, or their salts, isomers, or salts of isomers, without first obtaining photo identification of the person that shows the date of birth of the person.

3. A person buying or receiving a product at retail containing any detectable quantity of ephedrine, pseudoephedrine, or phenylpropanolamine, or their salts, isomers, or salts of isomers, from a pharmacy licensed by, or shopkeeper or itinerant vendor registered with, the department of health under chapter 18.64 RCW, or an employee thereof, a practitioner as defined in RCW 18.64.011, or a traditional Chinese herbal practitioner must first produce photo identification of the person that shows the date of birth of the person.

4. Any product containing any detectable quantity of ephedrine, pseudoephedrine, or phenylpropanolamine, or their salts, isomers, or salts of isomers, shall be kept (a) behind a counter where the public is not permitted, or (b) in a locked display case so that a customer wanting access must ask an employee of the merchant for assistance.

5. No pharmacy licensed by, or shopkeeper or itinerant vendor registered with, the department of health under chapter 18.64 RCW, or an employee thereof, a practitioner as defined in RCW 18.64.011, or a traditional Chinese herbal practitioner may sell any product containing any detectable quantity of ephedrine, pseudoephedrine, or phenylpropanolamine, or their salts, isomers, or salts of isomers, to a person that is not at least eighteen years old.

6. A pharmacy licensed by, or shopkeeper or itinerant vendor registered with, the department of health under chapter 18.64 RCW selling a nonprescription drug containing ephedrine, pseudoephedrine, phenylpropanolamine, or their salts, isomers, or salts of isomers shall require the purchaser to electronically or manually sign a record of the transaction. The record must include the name and address of the purchaser, the date and time of the sale, the name and initials of the shopkeeper, itinerant vendor, pharmacist, pharmacy technician, or employee conducting the transaction, the name of the product being sold, as well as the total quantity in grams, of ephedrine, pseudoephedrine, phenylpropanolamine, or their salts, isomers, or salts of isomers, being sold.

7. The pharmacy quality assurance commission, by rule, may exempt products containing ephedrine, pseudoephedrine, or phenylpropanolamine, or their salts, isomers, or salts of isomers, in combination with another active ingredient from the requirements of this section if they are found not to be used in the illegal manufacture of methamphetamine or other controlled dangerous substances. A manufacturer of a drug product may apply for removal of the product from the requirements of this section if the product is determined by the commission to have been formulated in such a way as to effectively prevent the conversion of the active ingredient into methamphetamine. The burden of proof for exemption is upon the person requesting the exemption. The petitioner shall provide the commission with evidence that the product has been formulated in such a way as to serve as an effective general deterrent to the conversion of pseudoephedrine into methamphetamine. The evidence must include the furnishing of a valid scientific study, conducted by an independent, professional laboratory and evincing professional quality chemical analysis. Factors to be considered in whether a product should be excluded from this section include but are not limited to:

    a.  Ease with which the product can be converted to methamphetamine;

    b.  Ease with which ephedrine, pseudoephedrine, or phenylpropanolamine is extracted from the substance and whether it forms an emulsion, salt, or other form;

    c.  Whether the product contains a "molecular lock" that renders it incapable of being converted into methamphetamine;

    d.  Presence of other ingredients that render the product less likely to be used in the manufacture of methamphetamine; and

    e.  Any pertinent data that can be used to determine the risk of the substance being used in the illegal manufacture of methamphetamine or any other controlled substance.

8. Nothing in this section applies:

    a.  To any product containing ephedrine, pseudoephedrine, or phenylpropanolamine, or their salts, isomers, or salts of isomers that is not the only active ingredient and that is in liquid, liquid capsule, or gel capsule form;

    b.  To the sale of a product that may only be sold upon the presentation of a prescription;

    c.  To the sale of a product by a traditional Chinese herbal practitioner to a patient; or

    d.  When the details of the transaction are recorded in a pharmacy profile individually identified with the recipient and maintained by a licensed pharmacy.

9. [Empty]

    a.  No pharmacy licensed by, or shopkeeper or itinerant vendor registered with, the department of health under chapter 18.64 RCW, a practitioner as defined in RCW 18.64.011, or a traditional Chinese herbal practitioner may retaliate against any employee that has made a good faith attempt to comply with the requirements of this section by requesting that a customer present photo identification, making a reasonable effort to determine the customer's age.

    b.  No pharmacy licensed by, or shopkeeper or itinerant vendor registered with, the department of health under chapter 18.64 RCW, a practitioner as defined in RCW 18.64.011, or a traditional Chinese herbal practitioner is subject to prosecution under subsection (10) of this section if they made a good faith attempt to comply with the requirements of this section by requesting that a customer present photo identification, making a reasonable effort to determine the customer's age.

10. A violation of this section is a gross misdemeanor.

\[ [2013 c 19 § 75](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/2013-14/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/House/1609.SL.pdf?cite=2013%20c%2019%20§%2075); [2010 c 182 § 1](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/2009-10/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/House/2961-S2.SL.pdf?cite=2010%20c%20182%20§%201); [2005 c 388 § 2](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/2005-06/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/House/2266-S.SL.pdf?cite=2005%20c%20388%20§%202); \]

## 69.43.110 - Ephedrine, pseudoephedrine, phenylpropanolamine—Sales restrictions—Electronic sales tracking system—Penalty.
1. It is unlawful for a pharmacy licensed by, or shopkeeper or itinerant vendor registered with, the department of health under chapter 18.64 RCW, or an employee thereof, or a practitioner as defined in RCW 18.64.011, knowingly to sell, transfer, or to otherwise furnish, in a single transaction a total of more than 3.6 grams of ephedrine, pseudoephedrine, or phenylpropanolamine, their salts, isomers, or salts of isomers, in any twenty-four hour period or more than a total of nine grams per purchaser in any thirty-day period.

2. It is unlawful for a person who is not a manufacturer, wholesaler, pharmacy, practitioner, shopkeeper, or itinerant vendor licensed by or registered with the department of health under chapter 18.64 RCW to purchase or acquire more than 3.6 grams in any twenty-four hour period, or more than a total of nine grams in any thirty-day period, of the substances specified in subsection (1) of this section.

3. It is unlawful for any person to sell or distribute any of the substances specified in subsection (1) of this section unless the person is licensed by or registered with the department of health under chapter 18.64 RCW, or is a practitioner as defined in RCW 18.64.011.

4. [Empty]

    a.  Beginning July 1, 2011, or the date upon which the electronic sales tracking system established under RCW 69.43.165 is available, whichever is later, a pharmacy licensed by, or shopkeeper or itinerant vendor registered with, the department of health under chapter 18.64 RCW shall, before completing a sale under this section, submit the required information to the electronic sales tracking system established under RCW 69.43.165, as long as such a system is available without cost to the pharmacy, shopkeeper, or itinerant vendor for accessing the system. The pharmacy, shopkeeper, or itinerant vendor may not complete the sale if the system generates a stop sale alert, except as permitted in RCW 69.43.165.

    b.  If a pharmacy, shopkeeper, or itinerant vendor selling a nonprescription drug containing ephedrine, pseudoephedrine, or phenylpropanolamine, or their salts, isomers, or salts of isomers experiences mechanical or electronic failure of the electronic sales tracking system and is unable to comply with the electronic sales tracking requirement, he or she shall maintain a written log or an alternative electronic recordkeeping mechanism until such time as he or she is able to comply with the electronic sales tracking requirement.

    c.  A pharmacy, shopkeeper, or itinerant vendor selling a nonprescription drug containing ephedrine, pseudoephedrine, or phenylpropanolamine, or their salts, isomers, or salts of isomers may seek an exemption from submitting transactions to the electronic sales tracking system in writing to the pharmacy quality assurance commission stating the reasons for the exemption. The commission may grant an exemption for good cause shown, but in no event shall a granted exemption exceed one hundred eighty days. The commission may grant multiple exemptions for any pharmacy, shopkeeper, or itinerant vendor if the good cause shown indicates significant hardship for compliance with this section. A pharmacy, shopkeeper, or itinerant vendor that receives an exemption shall maintain a logbook in hard copy form and must require the purchaser to provide the information required under this section before the completion of any sale. The logbook shall be maintained as a record of each sale for inspection by any law enforcement officer or commission inspector during normal business hours in accordance with any rules adopted pursuant to RCW 69.43.165. For purposes of this subsection (4)(c), "good cause" includes, but is not limited to, situations where the installation of the necessary equipment to access the system is unavailable or cost-prohibitive to the pharmacy, shopkeeper, or itinerant vendor.

    d.  A pharmacy, shopkeeper, or itinerant vendor may withdraw from participating in the electronic sales tracking system if the system is no longer being furnished without cost for accessing the system. A pharmacy, shopkeeper, or itinerant vendor who withdraws from the electronic sales tracking system is subject to the same requirements as a pharmacy, shopkeeper, or itinerant vendor who has been granted an exemption under (c) of this subsection.

    e.  For the purposes of this subsection (4) and RCW 69.43.165:

        i.  "Cost for accessing the system" means costs relating to:

            A.  Access to the web-based electronic sales tracking software, including inputting and retrieving data;

            B.  The web-based software known as software as a service;

            C.  Training; and

            D.  Technical support to integrate to point of sale vendors, if necessary.

        ii.  "Cost for accessing the system" does not include:

            A.  Costs relating to required internet access;

            B.  Optional hardware that a pharmacy may choose to purchase for workflow purposes; or

            C.  Other equipment.

5. A violation of this section is a gross misdemeanor.

\[ [2013 c 19 § 76](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/2013-14/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/House/1609.SL.pdf?cite=2013%20c%2019%20§%2076); [2010 c 182 § 2](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/2009-10/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/House/2961-S2.SL.pdf?cite=2010%20c%20182%20§%202); [2005 c 388 § 4](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/2005-06/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/House/2266-S.SL.pdf?cite=2005%20c%20388%20§%204); [2004 c 52 § 5](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/2003-04/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/Senate/6478-S.SL.pdf?cite=2004%20c%2052%20§%205); [2001 c 96 § 9](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/2001-02/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/Senate/5017-S.SL.pdf?cite=2001%20c%2096%20§%209); \]

## 69.43.120 - Ephedrine, pseudoephedrine, phenylpropanolamine—Possession of more than fifteen grams—Penalty—Exceptions.
1. Any person who possesses more than fifteen grams of ephedrine, pseudoephedrine, or phenylpropanolamine, their salts, isomers, or salts of isomers, or a combination of any of those substances, is guilty of a gross misdemeanor.

2. This section does not apply to any of the following:

    a.  A pharmacist or other authorized person who sells or furnishes ephedrine, pseudoephedrine, or phenylpropanolamine, their salts, isomers, or salts of isomers upon the prescription of a practitioner, as defined in RCW 69.41.010;

    b.  A practitioner who administers or furnishes ephedrine, pseudoephedrine, or phenylpropanolamine, their salts, isomers, or salts of isomers to his or her patients;

    c.  A pharmacy, manufacturer, or wholesaler licensed by, or shopkeeper or itinerant vendor registered with, the department of health under chapter 18.64 RCW;

    d.  A person in the course of his or her business of selling, transporting, or storing ephedrine, pseudoephedrine, or phenylpropanolamine, their salts, isomers, or salts of isomers, for a person described in (a), (b), or (c) of this subsection; or

    e.  A person in possession of more than fifteen grams of ephedrine, pseudoephedrine, or phenylpropanolamine, their salts, isomers, or salts of isomers in their home or residence under circumstances consistent with typical medicinal or household use as indicated by, but not limited to, storage location and possession of products in a variety of strengths, brands, types, purposes, and expiration dates.

\[ [2001 c 96 § 10](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/2001-02/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/Senate/5017-S.SL.pdf?cite=2001%20c%2096%20§%2010); \]

## 69.43.130 - Exemptions—Pediatric products—Products exempted by the pharmacy quality assurance commission.
RCW 69.43.110 and 69.43.120 do not apply to:

1. Pediatric products primarily intended for administration to children under twelve years of age, according to label instructions, either: (a) In solid dosage form whose individual dosage units do not exceed fifteen milligrams of ephedrine, pseudoephedrine, or phenylpropanolamine; or (b) in liquid form whose recommended dosage, according to label instructions, does not exceed fifteen milligrams of ephedrine, pseudoephedrine, or phenylpropanolamine per five milliliters of liquid product;

2. Pediatric liquid products primarily intended for administration to children under two years of age for which the recommended dosage does not exceed two milliliters and the total package content does not exceed one fluid ounce;

3. Products that the pharmacy quality assurance commission, upon application of a manufacturer, exempts by rule from RCW 69.43.110 and 69.43.120 because the product has been formulated in such a way as to effectively prevent the conversion of the active ingredient into methamphetamine, or its salts or precursors; or

4. Products, as packaged, that the pharmacy quality assurance commission, upon application of a manufacturer, exempts from RCW 69.43.110(1) and 69.43.120 because:

    a.  The product meets the federal definition of an ordinary over-the-counter pseudoephedrine product as defined in 21 U.S.C. 802;

    b.  The product is a salt, isomer, or salts of isomers of pseudoephedrine and, as packaged, has a total weight of more than three grams but the net weight of the pseudoephedrine base is equal to or less than three grams; and

    c.  The pharmacy quality assurance commission determines that the value to the people of the state of having the product, as packaged, available for sale to consumers outweighs the danger, and the product, as packaged, has not been used in the illegal manufacture of methamphetamine.

\[ [2013 c 19 § 77](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/2013-14/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/House/1609.SL.pdf?cite=2013%20c%2019%20§%2077); [2004 c 52 § 7](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/2003-04/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/Senate/6478-S.SL.pdf?cite=2004%20c%2052%20§%207); [2001 c 96 § 11](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/2001-02/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/Senate/5017-S.SL.pdf?cite=2001%20c%2096%20§%2011); \]

## 69.43.135 - Iodine, methylsulfonylmethane—Sales restrictions—Recording of transactions—Penalties.
1. The definitions in this subsection apply throughout this section unless the context clearly requires otherwise.

    a.  "Iodine matrix" means iodine at a concentration greater than two percent by weight in a matrix or solution.

    b.  "Matrix" means something, as a substance, in which something else originates, develops, or is contained.

    c.  "Methylsulfonylmethane" means methylsulfonylmethane in its powder form only, and does not include products containing methylsulfonylmethane in other forms such as liquids, tablets, capsules not containing methylsulfonylmethane in pure powder form, ointments, creams, cosmetics, foods, and beverages.

2. Any person who knowingly purchases in a thirty-day period or possesses any quantity of iodine in its elemental form, an iodine matrix, or more than two pounds of methylsulfonylmethane is guilty of a gross misdemeanor, except as provided in subsection (3) of this section.

3. Subsection (2) of this section does not apply to:

    a.  A person who possesses iodine in its elemental form or an iodine matrix as a prescription drug, under a prescription issued by a licensed veterinarian, physician, or advanced registered nurse practitioner;

    b.  A person who possesses iodine in its elemental form, an iodine matrix, or any quantity of methylsulfonylmethane in its powder form and is actively engaged in the practice of animal husbandry of livestock;

    c.  A person who possesses iodine in its elemental form or an iodine matrix in conjunction with experiments conducted in a chemistry or chemistry-related laboratory maintained by a:

        i.  Public or private secondary school;

        ii.  Public or private institution of higher education that is accredited by a regional or national accrediting agency recognized by the United States department of education;

        iii.  Manufacturing facility, government agency, or research facility in the course of lawful business activities;

    d.  A veterinarian, physician, advanced registered nurse practitioner, pharmacist, retail distributor, wholesaler, manufacturer, warehouse operator, or common carrier, or an agent of any of these persons who possesses iodine in its elemental form, an iodine matrix, or methylsulfonylmethane in its powder form in the regular course of lawful business activities; or

    e.  A person working in a general hospital who possesses iodine in its elemental form or an iodine matrix in the regular course of employment at the hospital.

4. Any person who purchases any quantity of iodine in its elemental form, an iodine matrix, or any quantity of methylsulfonylmethane must present an identification card or driver's license issued by any state in the United States or jurisdiction of another country before purchasing the item.

5. The Washington state patrol shall develop a form to be used in recording transactions involving iodine in its elemental form, an iodine matrix, or methylsulfonylmethane. A person who sells or otherwise transfers any quantity of iodine in its elemental form, an iodine matrix, or any quantity of methylsulfonylmethane to a person for any purpose authorized in subsection (3) of this section must record each sale or transfer. The record must be made on the form developed by the Washington state patrol and must be retained by the person for at least three years. The Washington state patrol or any local law enforcement agency may request access to the records.

    a.  Failure to make or retain a record required under this subsection is a misdemeanor.

    b.  Failure to comply with a request for access to records required under this subsection to the Washington state patrol or a local law enforcement agency is a misdemeanor.

\[ [2011 c 336 § 838](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/2011-12/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/Senate/5045.SL.pdf?cite=2011%20c%20336%20§%20838); [2006 c 188 § 1](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/2005-06/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/House/2567.SL.pdf?cite=2006%20c%20188%20§%201); \]

## 69.43.140 - Civil penalty—Pharmacy quality assurance commission waiver.
1. In addition to the other penalties provided for in this chapter or in chapter 18.64 RCW, the pharmacy quality assurance commission may impose a civil penalty, not to exceed ten thousand dollars for each violation, on any licensee or registrant who has failed to comply with this chapter or the rules adopted under this chapter. In the case of a continuing violation, every day the violation continues shall be considered a separate violation.

2. The pharmacy quality assurance commission may waive the suspension or revocation of a license or registration issued under chapter 18.64 RCW, or waive any civil penalty under this chapter, if the licensee or registrant establishes that he or she acted in good faith to prevent violations of this chapter, and the violation occurred despite the licensee's or registrant's exercise of due diligence. In making such a determination, the pharmacy quality assurance commission may consider evidence that an employer trained employees on how to sell, transfer, or otherwise furnish substances specified in RCW 69.43.010(1) in accordance with applicable laws.

\[ [2013 c 19 § 78](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/2013-14/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/House/1609.SL.pdf?cite=2013%20c%2019%20§%2078); [2001 c 96 § 12](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/2001-02/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/Senate/5017-S.SL.pdf?cite=2001%20c%2096%20§%2012); \]

## 69.43.150 - Application of chapter to local government.
This chapter is applicable and uniform throughout this state and in all counties, cities, code cities, and towns therein. A county, city, code city, or town may not adopt or enforce any ordinance, pertaining to this chapter, which prohibits conduct that is not prohibited under this chapter, or defining violations or penalties different from those provided under this chapter. However, this section does not preclude a county, city, code city, or town from revoking, canceling, suspending, or otherwise limiting a business or professional license it has issued for conduct that violates any provision of this chapter.

\[ [2001 c 96 § 13](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/2001-02/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/Senate/5017-S.SL.pdf?cite=2001%20c%2096%20§%2013); \]

## 69.43.160 - Ephedrine, pseudoephedrine, phenylpropanolamine—Methods to prevent sales violations—Department of health preparation of sign summarizing prohibitions.
1. To prevent violations of RCW 69.43.110, every licensee and registrant under chapter 18.64 RCW, who sells at retail any products containing ephedrine, pseudoephedrine, or phenylpropanolamine, or their salts, isomers, or salts of isomers, shall do either or may do both of the following:

    a.  Program scanners, cash registers, or other electronic devices used to record sales in a manner that will alert persons handling transactions to potential violations of RCW 69.43.110(1) and/or prevent such violations; or

    b.  Place one or more signs on the premises to notify customers of the prohibitions of RCW 69.43.110. Any such sign may, but is not required to, conform to the language and format prepared by the department of health under subsection (2) of this section.

2. The department of health shall prepare language and format for a sign summarizing the prohibitions in RCW 69.43.110 and 69.43.120 and make the language and format available to licensees and registrants under chapter 18.64 RCW, for voluntary use in their places of business to inform customers and employees of the prohibitions. Nothing in this section requires the department of health to provide licensees or registrants with copies of signs, or any licensee or registrant to use the specific language or format prepared by the department under this subsection.

\[ [2001 c 96 § 14](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/2001-02/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/Senate/5017-S.SL.pdf?cite=2001%20c%2096%20§%2014); \]

## 69.43.165 - Ephedrine, pseudoephedrine, phenylpropanolamine—Electronic sales tracking system—Pharmacy quality assurance commission authority to adopt rules.
1. The pharmacy quality assurance commission shall implement a real-time electronic sales tracking system to monitor the nonprescription sale of products in this state containing any detectable quantity of ephedrine, pseudoephedrine, phenylpropanolamine, or their salts, isomers, or salts of isomers, provided that the system is available to the state without cost for accessing the system to the state or retailers. The commission is authorized to enter into a public-private partnership, through a memorandum of understanding or similar arrangement, to make the system available.

2. The records submitted to the tracking system are for the confidential use of the pharmacy, shopkeeper, or itinerant vendor who submitted them, except that:

    a.  The records must be produced in court when lawfully required;

    b.  The records must be open for inspection by the pharmacy quality assurance commission; and

    c.  The records must be available to any general or limited authority Washington peace officer to enforce the provisions of this chapter or to federal law enforcement officers in accordance with rules adopted by the pharmacy quality assurance commission regarding the privacy of the purchaser of products covered by chapter 182, Laws of 2010 and law enforcement access to the records submitted to the tracking system as provided in this section consistent with the federal combat meth act.

3. The electronic sales tracking system shall be capable of generating a stop sale alert, which shall be a notification that completion of the sale would result in the seller or purchaser violating the quantity limits in RCW 69.43.110 (1) and (2). The system shall contain an override function for use by a dispenser of ephedrine, pseudoephedrine, phenylpropanolamine, or their salts, isomers, or salts of isomers, who has a reasonable fear of imminent bodily harm. Each instance in which the override function is utilized shall be logged by the system.

4. The pharmacy quality assurance commission shall have the authority to adopt rules necessary to implement and enforce the provisions of this section. The pharmacy quality assurance commission shall adopt rules regarding the privacy of the purchaser of products covered by chapter 182, Laws of 2010, and any public or law enforcement access to the records submitted to the tracking system as provided in subsection (2)(c) of this section consistent with the federal combat meth act.

5. The pharmacy quality assurance commission may not raise licensing or registration fees to fund the rule making or implementation of this section.

\[ [2013 c 19 § 79](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/2013-14/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/House/1609.SL.pdf?cite=2013%20c%2019%20§%2079); [2010 c 182 § 3](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/2009-10/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/House/2961-S2.SL.pdf?cite=2010%20c%20182%20§%203); \]

## 69.43.168 - Pharmacy, shopkeeper, or itinerant vendor—Electronic sales tracking system—Liability.
A pharmacy, shopkeeper, or itinerant vendor participating in the electronic sales tracking system under RCW 69.43.110(4):

1. Is not liable for civil damages resulting from any act or omission in carrying out the requirements of RCW 69.43.110(4), other than an act or omission constituting gross negligence or willful or wanton misconduct; and

2. Is not liable for civil damages resulting from a data breach that was proximately caused by a failure on the part of the electronic sales tracking system to take reasonable care through the use of industry standard levels of encryption to guard against unauthorized access to account information that is in the possession or control of the system.

\[ [2010 c 182 § 4](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/2009-10/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/House/2961-S2.SL.pdf?cite=2010%20c%20182%20§%204); \]

## 69.43.180 - Expansion of log requirements—Petition by law enforcement.
1. The Washington association of sheriffs and police chiefs or the Washington state patrol may petition the pharmacy quality assurance commission to apply the log requirements in *RCW 69.43.170 to one or more products that contain ephedrine, pseudoephedrine, or phenylpropanolamine, or their salts, isomers, or salts of isomers, that is not the only active ingredient and that is in liquid, liquid capsule, or gel capsule form. The petition shall establish that:

    a.  Ephedrine, pseudoephedrine, or phenylpropanolamine can be effectively extracted from the product and converted into methamphetamine or another controlled dangerous substance; and

    b.  Law enforcement, the Washington state patrol, or the department of ecology are finding substantial evidence that the product is being used for the illegal manufacture of methamphetamine or another controlled dangerous substance.

2. The pharmacy quality assurance commission shall adopt rules when a petition establishes that requiring the application of the log requirements in *RCW 69.43.170 to the sale of the product at retail is warranted based upon the effectiveness and extent of use of the product for the illegal manufacture of methamphetamine or other controlled dangerous substances and the extent of the burden of any restrictions upon consumers. The pharmacy quality assurance commission may adopt emergency rules to apply the log requirements to the sale of a product when the petition establishes that the immediate restriction of the product is necessary in order to protect public health and safety.

\[ [2013 c 19 § 80](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/2013-14/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/House/1609.SL.pdf?cite=2013%20c%2019%20§%2080); [2005 c 388 § 3](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/2005-06/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/House/2266-S.SL.pdf?cite=2005%20c%20388%20§%203); \]

## 69.43.190 - Products found at methamphetamine sites—Report.
Each county sheriff shall compile and maintain a record of commercial products containing ephedrine, pseudoephedrine, or phenylpropanolamine and packaging found at methamphetamine laboratory sites. The data shall be forwarded to the Washington association of sheriffs and police chiefs and shall be reported to the legislature by November 1, 2007, and annually thereafter.

\[ [2005 c 388 § 9](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/2005-06/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/House/2266-S.SL.pdf?cite=2005%20c%20388%20§%209); \]

