# 69.53 - Use of buildings for unlawful drugs.
* [69.53.010 - Unlawful use of building for drug purposes—Liability of owner or manager—Penalty.](#6953010---unlawful-use-of-building-for-drug-purposesliability-of-owner-or-managerpenalty)
* [69.53.020 - Unlawful fortification of building for drug purposes—Penalty.](#6953020---unlawful-fortification-of-building-for-drug-purposespenalty)
* [69.53.030 - Unlawful use of fortified building—Penalty.](#6953030---unlawful-use-of-fortified-buildingpenalty)
## 69.53.010 - Unlawful use of building for drug purposes—Liability of owner or manager—Penalty.
1. It is unlawful for any person who has under his or her management or control any building, room, space, or enclosure, either as an owner, lessee, agent, employee, or mortgagee, to knowingly rent, lease, or make available for use, with or without compensation, the building, room, space, or enclosure for the purpose of unlawfully manufacturing, delivering, selling, storing, or giving away any controlled substance under chapter 69.50 RCW, legend drug under chapter 69.41 RCW, or imitation controlled substance under chapter 69.52 RCW.

2. It shall be a defense for an owner, manager, or other person in control pursuant to subsection (1) of this section to, in good faith, notify a law enforcement agency of suspected drug activity pursuant to subsection (1) of this section, or to process an unlawful detainer action for drug-related activity against the tenant or occupant.

3. A violation of this section is a class C felony punishable under chapter 9A.20 RCW.

\[ [1988 c 150 § 13](http://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1988c150.pdf?cite=1988%20c%20150%20§%2013); [1987 c 458 § 7](http://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1987c458.pdf?cite=1987%20c%20458%20§%207); \]

## 69.53.020 - Unlawful fortification of building for drug purposes—Penalty.
1. It is unlawful for any person who has under his or her management or control any building, room, space, or enclosure, either as an owner, lessee, agent, employee, or mortgagee, to knowingly allow the building, room, space, or enclosure to be fortified to suppress law enforcement entry in order to further the unlawful manufacture, delivery, sale, storage, or gift of any controlled substance under chapter 69.50 RCW, legend drug under chapter 69.41 RCW, or imitation controlled substance under chapter 69.52 RCW.

2. It shall be a defense for an owner, manager, or other person in control pursuant to subsection (1) of this section to, in good faith, notify a law enforcement agency of suspected drug activity pursuant to subsection (1) of this section, or to process an unlawful detainer action for drug-related activity against the tenant or occupant.

3. A violation of this section is a class C felony punishable under chapter 9A.20 RCW.

\[ [1988 c 150 § 14](http://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1988c150.pdf?cite=1988%20c%20150%20§%2014); [1987 c 458 § 8](http://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1987c458.pdf?cite=1987%20c%20458%20§%208); \]

## 69.53.030 - Unlawful use of fortified building—Penalty.
1. It is unlawful for any person to use a building, room, space, or enclosure specifically designed to suppress law enforcement entry in order to unlawfully manufacture, deliver, sell, store, or give away any controlled substance under chapter 69.50 RCW, legend drug under chapter 69.41 RCW, or imitation controlled substance under chapter 69.52 RCW.

2. A violation of this section is a class C felony punishable under chapter 9A.20 RCW.

\[ [1987 c 458 § 9](http://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1987c458.pdf?cite=1987%20c%20458%20§%209); \]

