# Substitute Senate Bill 5358 as Recommended by Human Services, Reentry & Rehabilitation

[Source](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/2021-22/Xml/Bills/Senate%20Bills/5358-S.xml)
## Section 1
(1) This section is the tax preference performance statement for the tax preferences contained in sections 2 and 3, chapter . . ., Laws of 2021 (sections 2 and 3 of this act). This performance statement is only intended to be used for subsequent evaluation of the tax preference. It is not intended to create a private right of action by any party or be used to determine eligibility for preferential tax treatment.
(2) The legislature categorizes these tax preferences as ones intended to induce certain designated behavior by taxpayers and create or retain jobs, as indicated in RCW 82.32.808(2) (a) and (c).
(3) It is the legislature's specific public policy objective to encourage the employment of certain unemployed persons, such as persons convicted of a felony and homeless persons. It is the legislature's intent to provide employers a credit against the business and occupation tax or public utility tax for hiring certain unemployed persons which would reduce an employer's tax burden thereby inducing employers to hire and create jobs for such persons. Pursuant to chapter 43.136 RCW, the joint legislative audit and review committee must review the business and occupation tax and public utility tax credit established under sections 2 and 3, chapter . . ., Laws of 2021 (sections 2 and 3 of this act) by December 31, 2030.
(4) If a review finds that the number of unemployed persons who meet the criteria in section 2(7)(c)(i) or 3(7)(c)(i) of this act decreased by 30 percent, then the legislature intends for the legislative auditor to recommend extending the expiration date of the tax preference.
(5) In order to obtain the data necessary to perform the review in subsection (4) of this section, the joint legislative audit and review committee should refer to unemployment rates available from the employment security department and the bureau of labor statistics.
