[wa-law.org](/) > [bill](/bill/) > [2023-24](/bill/2023-24/) > [SB 5730](/bill/2023-24/sb/5730/) > [Second Substitute](/bill/2023-24/sb/5730/S2/)

# SB 5730 - Vehicle residences/impound

[Source](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/2023-24/Pdf/Bills/Senate%20Bills/5730-S2.pdf)

## Section 1
1. [Empty]

    a. Vehicles or other items of personal property registered or titled with the department that are impounded by registered tow truck operators pursuant to RCW 46.55.080, 46.55.085, 46.55.113, or 9A.88.140 may be redeemed only by the following persons or entities:

        i. The legal owner;

        ii. The registered owner;

        iii. A person authorized in writing by the registered owner;

        iv. The vehicle's insurer or a vendor working on behalf of the vehicle's insurer;

    v. A third-party insurer that has a duty to repair or replace the vehicle, has obtained consent from the registered owner or the owner's agent to move the vehicle, and has documented that consent in the insurer's claim file, or a vendor working on behalf of a third-party insurer that has received such consent; provided, however, that at all times the registered owner must be granted access to and may reclaim possession of the vehicle. For the purposes of this subsection, "owner's agent" means the legal owner of the vehicle, a driver in possession of the vehicle with the registered owner's permission, or an adult member of the registered owner's family;

    vi. A person who is determined and verified by the operator to have the permission of the registered owner of the vehicle or other item of personal property registered or titled with the department;

    vii. A person who has purchased a vehicle or item of personal property registered or titled with the department from the registered owner who produces proof of ownership or written authorization and signs a receipt therefor;

    viii. If (a)(i) through (vii) of this subsection do not apply, a person, who is known to the registered or legal owner of a motorcycle or moped, as each are defined in chapter 46.04 RCW, that was towed from the scene of an accident, may redeem the motorcycle or moped as a bailment in accordance with RCW 46.55.125 while the registered or legal owner is admitted as a patient in a hospital due to the accident; or

        ix. A person who is authorized by a court to redeem the vehicle after an impound hearing or other procedure.

(A) A court or administrative hearing officer, for the jurisdiction in which the vehicle was impounded, may order the release of the vehicle to any person meeting the criteria in (a)(i) through (viii) of this subsection after a hearing or legal proceeding.

(B) If ownership of the vehicle or authorization from the legal or registered owner to use, reside in, or retrieve the vehicle is disputed, a court or hearing officer may review any additionally presented information and evidence at a court or administrative hearing. If a person is unable to present sufficient evidence that the person meets the criteria in (a)(i) through (viii) of this subsection, a court, with good cause, may set aside the hearing for up to 15 business days, unless extenuating circumstances require additional time, to allow the person an opportunity to file appropriate ownership paperwork with the department or to obtain written authorization from the legal or registered owner to redeem the vehicle. If a claimant files a claim under RCW 46.12.680 during this additional time, a court may grant an additional continuance until that legal proceeding has ended.

    b. In addition, a vehicle impounded because the operator is in violation of RCW 46.20.342(1)(c) shall not be released until a person eligible to redeem it under (a) of this subsection satisfies the requirements of (f) of this subsection, including paying all towing, removal, and storage fees, notwithstanding the fact that the hold was ordered by a government agency. If the department's records show that the operator has been convicted of a violation of RCW 46.20.342 or a similar local ordinance within the past five years, the vehicle may be held for up to 30 days at the written direction of the agency ordering the vehicle impounded. A vehicle impounded because the operator is arrested for a violation of RCW 46.20.342 may be released only pursuant to a written order from the agency that ordered the vehicle impounded or from the court having jurisdiction. An agency shall issue a written order to release pursuant to a provision of an applicable state agency rule or local ordinance authorizing release on the basis of the following:

        i. Economic or personal hardship to the spouse of the operator, taking into consideration public safety factors, including the operator's criminal history and driving record; or

        ii. The owner of the vehicle was not the driver, the owner did not know that the driver's license was suspended or revoked, and the owner has not received a prior release under this subsection or RCW 46.55.113(3).

In order to avoid discriminatory application, other than for the reasons for release set forth in (b)(i) and (ii) of this subsection, an agency shall, under a provision of an applicable state agency rule or local ordinance, deny release in all other circumstances without discretion.

If a vehicle is impounded because the operator is in violation of RCW 46.20.342(1) (a) or (b), the vehicle may be held for up to thirty days at the written direction of the agency ordering the vehicle impounded. However, if the department's records show that the operator has been convicted of a violation of RCW 46.20.342(1) (a) or (b) or a similar local ordinance within the past five years, the vehicle may be held at the written direction of the agency ordering the vehicle impounded for up to 60 days, and for up to 90 days if the operator has two or more such prior offenses. If a vehicle is impounded because the operator is arrested for a violation of RCW 46.20.342, the vehicle may not be released until a person eligible to redeem it under (a) of this subsection satisfies the requirements of (f) of this subsection, including paying all towing, removal, and storage fees, notwithstanding the fact that the hold was ordered by a government agency.

    c. If the vehicle is directed to be held for a suspended license impound, a person who desires to redeem the vehicle at the end of the period of impound shall within five days of the impound at the request of the tow truck operator pay a security deposit to the tow truck operator of not more than one-half of the applicable impound storage rate for each day of the proposed suspended license impound. The tow truck operator shall credit this amount against the final bill for removal, towing, and storage upon redemption. The tow truck operator may accept other sufficient security in lieu of the security deposit. If the person desiring to redeem the vehicle does not pay the security deposit or provide other security acceptable to the tow truck operator, the tow truck operator may process and sell at auction the vehicle as an abandoned vehicle within the normal time limits set out in RCW 46.55.130(1). The security deposit required by this section may be paid and must be accepted at any time up to 24 hours before the beginning of the auction to sell the vehicle as abandoned. The registered owner is not eligible to purchase the vehicle at the auction, and the tow truck operator shall sell the vehicle to the highest bidder who is not the registered owner.

    d. Notwithstanding (c) of this subsection, a rental car business may immediately redeem a rental vehicle it owns by payment of the costs of removal, towing, and storage, whereupon the vehicle will not be held for a suspended license impound.

    e. Notwithstanding (c) of this subsection, a motor vehicle dealer or lender with a perfected security interest in the vehicle may redeem or lawfully repossess a vehicle immediately by payment of the costs of removal, towing, and storage, whereupon the vehicle will not be held for a suspended license impound. A motor vehicle dealer or lender with a perfected security interest in the vehicle may not knowingly and intentionally engage in collusion with a registered owner to repossess and then return or resell a vehicle to the registered owner in an attempt to avoid a suspended license impound. However, this provision does not preclude a vehicle dealer or a lender with a perfected security interest in the vehicle from repossessing the vehicle and then selling, leasing, or otherwise disposing of it in accordance with chapter 62A.9A RCW, including providing redemption rights to the debtor under RCW 62A.9A-623. If the debtor is the registered owner of the vehicle, the debtor's right to redeem the vehicle under chapter 62A.9A RCW is conditioned upon the debtor obtaining and providing proof from the impounding authority or court having jurisdiction that any fines, penalties, and forfeitures owed by the registered owner, as a result of the suspended license impound, have been paid, and proof of the payment must be tendered to the vehicle dealer or lender at the time the debtor tenders all other obligations required to redeem the vehicle. Vehicle dealers or lenders are not liable for damages if they rely in good faith on an order from the impounding agency or a court in releasing a vehicle held under a suspended license impound.

    f. The vehicle or other item of personal property registered or titled with the department shall be released upon the presentation to any person having custody of the vehicle of commercially reasonable tender sufficient to cover the costs of towing, storage, or other services rendered during the course of towing, removing, impounding, or storing any such vehicle, with credit being given for the amount of any security deposit paid under (c) of this subsection. In addition, if a vehicle is impounded because the operator was arrested for a violation of RCW 46.20.342 or 46.20.345 and was being operated by the registered owner when it was impounded under local ordinance or agency rule, it must not be released to any person until the registered owner establishes with the agency that ordered the vehicle impounded or the court having jurisdiction that any penalties, fines, or forfeitures owed by him or her have been satisfied. Registered tow truck operators are not liable for damages if they rely in good faith on an order from the impounding agency or a court in releasing a vehicle held under a suspended license impound. Commercially reasonable tender shall include, without limitation, cash, major bank credit cards issued by financial institutions, or personal checks drawn on Washington state branches of financial institutions if accompanied by two pieces of valid identification, one of which may be required by the operator to have a photograph. If the towing firm cannot determine through the customer's bank or a check verification service that the presented check would be paid by the bank or guaranteed by the service, the towing firm may refuse to accept the check. Any person who stops payment on a personal check or credit card, or does not make restitution within 10 days from the date a check becomes insufficient due to lack of funds, to a towing firm that has provided a service pursuant to this section or in any other manner defrauds the towing firm in connection with services rendered pursuant to this section shall be liable for damages in the amount of twice the towing and storage fees, plus costs and reasonable attorneys' fees.

2. [Empty]

    a. The registered tow truck operator shall give to each person who seeks to redeem an impounded vehicle, or item of personal property registered or titled with the department, written notice of the right of redemption and opportunity for a hearing, which notice shall be accompanied by a form to be used for requesting a hearing, the name of the person or agency authorizing the impound, and a copy of the towing and storage invoice. The registered tow truck operator shall maintain a record evidenced by the redeeming person's signature that such notification was provided.

    b. Any person seeking to redeem an impounded vehicle under this section has a right to a hearing in the district or municipal court for the jurisdiction in which the vehicle was impounded to contest the validity of the impoundment or the amount of towing and storage charges. The district court has jurisdiction to determine the issues involving all impoundments including those authorized by the state or its agents. The municipal court has jurisdiction to determine the issues involving impoundments authorized by agents of the municipality. Any request for a hearing shall be made in writing on the form provided for that purpose and must be received by the appropriate court within 10 days of the date the opportunity was provided for in (a) of this subsection and more than five days before the date of the auction. The court may consider a late request for a hearing for good cause when the vehicle is used as a residence if the request is made in writing on a form provided for that purpose more than five days before the date of the auction. At the time of the filing of the hearing request, the petitioner shall pay to the court clerk a filing fee in the same amount required for the filing of a suit in district court. If the hearing request is not received by the court within the 10-day period or by the extended deadline authorized for a vehicle used as a residence, the right to a hearing is waived and the registered owner is liable for any towing, storage, or other impoundment charges permitted under this chapter. Upon receipt of a timely hearing request, the court shall proceed to hear and determine the validity of the impoundment.

3. [Empty]

    a. The court, within five days after the request for a hearing, shall notify the registered tow truck operator, the person requesting the hearing if not the owner, the registered and legal owners of the vehicle or other item of personal property registered or titled with the department, and the person or agency authorizing the impound in writing of the hearing date and time.

    b. At the hearing, the person or persons requesting the hearing may produce any relevant evidence to show that the impoundment, towing, or storage fees charged were not proper. The court may consider a written report made under oath by the officer who authorized the impoundment in lieu of the officer's personal appearance at the hearing.

    c. At the conclusion of the hearing, the court shall determine whether the impoundment was proper, whether the towing or storage fees charged were in compliance with the posted rates, and who is responsible for payment of the fees.

        i. The court may not adjust fees or charges that are in compliance with the posted or contracted rates.

        ii. If the court finds that a vehicle is used as a residence, the court may consider the person's ability to pay the towing and storage fees charged and may reduce such fees if the court finds the person to be indigent. The department must pay the difference between the reduced fees and the tow truck operator's actual costs for the towing and storage if the tow truck operator applies for reimbursement to the department as authorized under section 2 of this act.

    d. If the impoundment is found proper, the impoundment, towing, and storage fees as permitted under this chapter together with court costs shall be assessed against the person or persons requesting the hearing, unless the operator did not have a signed and valid impoundment authorization from a private property owner or an authorized agent.

    e. If the impoundment is determined to be in violation of this chapter, then the registered and legal owners of the vehicle or other item of personal property registered or titled with the department shall bear no impoundment, towing, or storage fees, and any security shall be returned or discharged as appropriate, and the person or agency who authorized the impoundment shall be liable for any towing, storage, or other impoundment fees permitted under this chapter. The court shall enter judgment in favor of the registered tow truck operator against the person or agency authorizing the impound for the impoundment, towing, and storage fees paid. In addition, the court shall enter judgment in favor of the registered and legal owners of the vehicle, or other item of personal property registered or titled with the department, for the amount of the filing fee required by law for the impound hearing petition as well as reasonable damages for loss of the use of the vehicle during the time the same was impounded against the person or agency authorizing the impound. However, if an impoundment arising from an alleged violation of RCW 46.20.342 or 46.20.345 is determined to be in violation of this chapter, then the law enforcement officer directing the impoundment and the government employing the officer are not liable for damages if the officer relied in good faith and without gross negligence on the records of the department in ascertaining that the operator of the vehicle had a suspended or revoked driver's license. If any judgment entered is not paid within 15 days of notice in writing of its entry, the court shall award reasonable attorneys' fees and costs against the defendant in any action to enforce the judgment. Notice of entry of judgment may be made by registered or certified mail, and proof of mailing may be made by affidavit of the party mailing the notice. Notice of the entry of the judgment shall read essentially as follows:

TO:  . . . . . .

YOU ARE HEREBY NOTIFIED JUDGMENT was entered against you in the . . . . . . Court located at . . . . . . in the sum of $. . . . . ., in an action entitled . . . . . ., Case No. . . . .  YOU ARE FURTHER NOTIFIED that attorneys fees and costs will be awarded against you under RCW . . . if the judgment is not paid within 15 days of the date of this notice.

DATED this . . . . day of . . . . . ., (year) . . .

Signature . . . . . . . . . .

Typed name and address

of party mailing notice

4. Any impounded abandoned vehicle or item of personal property registered or titled with the department that is not redeemed within 15 days of mailing of the notice of custody and sale as required by RCW 46.55.110(3) shall be sold at public auction in accordance with all the provisions and subject to all the conditions of RCW 46.55.130. A vehicle or item of personal property registered or titled with the department may be redeemed at any time before the start of the auction upon payment of the applicable towing and storage fees.

## Section 2
1. If a court reduces towing and storage fees of a vehicle used as a residence by a person found to be indigent by the court, the registered tow truck operator may apply to the department on a form prescribed by the department for costs reimbursement to pay the difference between any reduced towing and storage fees and the tow truck operator's actual costs for the towing and storage.

2. The department may only use funds as authorized under section 3 of this act for costs reimbursement of a vehicle used as a residence. If at any time funds do not exist in the indigent impound account to reimburse claims submitted under subsection (1) of this section, the department must create and maintain a waitlist and distribute funds in the order the claims are received. Payment of any claims on the waitlist must be made only from the indigent impound account. As reimbursements from impounding authorities are deposited into the account as required under subsection (3) of this section, the department may distribute such funds at that time. The department is not civilly or criminally liable and may not have any penalty or cause of action of any nature arise against it regarding the provision or lack of provision of funds for reimbursement.

3. The department must seek reimbursement from the impounding authority for any cost reimbursement paid to a registered tow truck operator using funds authorized under section 3 of this act. Any repayment made by an impounding authority to the department must be deposited into the indigent impound account created under section 3 of this act.

## Section 3
The indigent impound account is created in the state treasury. Revenues to the account must consist of appropriations by the legislature, any gifts, grants, and endowments from public or private sources, and reimbursements to the department from impounding authorities under section 2(3) of this act. Moneys in the account may be spent only after appropriation. Expenditures from the account may be used only to pay the difference between any reduced towing and storage fees and a tow truck operator's actual costs for the towing and storage of a vehicle used as a residence as described under section 2 of this act.

## Section 4
1. All earnings of investments of surplus balances in the state treasury shall be deposited to the treasury income account, which account is hereby established in the state treasury.

2. The treasury income account shall be utilized to pay or receive funds associated with federal programs as required by the federal cash management improvement act of 1990. The treasury income account is subject in all respects to chapter 43.88 RCW, but no appropriation is required for refunds or allocations of interest earnings required by the cash management improvement act. Refunds of interest to the federal treasury required under the cash management improvement act fall under RCW 43.88.180 and shall not require appropriation. The office of financial management shall determine the amounts due to or from the federal government pursuant to the cash management improvement act. The office of financial management may direct transfers of funds between accounts as deemed necessary to implement the provisions of the cash management improvement act, and this subsection. Refunds or allocations shall occur prior to the distributions of earnings set forth in subsection (4) of this section.

3. Except for the provisions of RCW 43.84.160, the treasury income account may be utilized for the payment of purchased banking services on behalf of treasury funds including, but not limited to, depository, safekeeping, and disbursement functions for the state treasury and affected state agencies. The treasury income account is subject in all respects to chapter 43.88 RCW, but no appropriation is required for payments to financial institutions. Payments shall occur prior to distribution of earnings set forth in subsection (4) of this section.

4. Monthly, the state treasurer shall distribute the earnings credited to the treasury income account. The state treasurer shall credit the general fund with all the earnings credited to the treasury income account except:

    a. The following accounts and funds shall receive their proportionate share of earnings based upon each account's and fund's average daily balance for the period: The abandoned recreational vehicle disposal account, the aeronautics account, the Alaskan Way viaduct replacement project account, the ambulance transport fund, the brownfield redevelopment trust fund account, the budget stabilization account, the capital vessel replacement account, the capitol building construction account, the Central Washington University capital projects account, the charitable, educational, penal and reformatory institutions account, the Chehalis basin account, the Chehalis basin taxable account, the cleanup settlement account, the climate active transportation account, the climate transit programs account, the Columbia river basin water supply development account, the Columbia river basin taxable bond water supply development account, the Columbia river basin water supply revenue recovery account, the common school construction fund, the community forest trust account, the connecting Washington account, the county arterial preservation account, the county criminal justice assistance account, the deferred compensation administrative account, the deferred compensation principal account, the department of licensing services account, the department of retirement systems expense account, the developmental disabilities community services account, the diesel idle reduction account, the drinking water assistance account, the administrative subaccount of the drinking water assistance account, the early learning facilities development account, the early learning facilities revolving account, the Eastern Washington University capital projects account, the education construction fund, the education legacy trust account, the election account, the electric vehicle account, the energy freedom account, the energy recovery act account, the essential rail assistance account, The Evergreen State College capital projects account, the fair start for kids account, the ferry bond retirement fund, the fish, wildlife, and conservation account, the freight mobility investment account, the freight mobility multimodal account, the grade crossing protective fund, the public health services account, the state higher education construction account, the higher education construction account, the higher education retirement plan supplemental benefit fund, the highway bond retirement fund, the highway infrastructure account, the highway safety fund, the hospital safety net assessment fund, the indigent impound account, the Interstate 405 and state route number 167 express toll lanes account, the judges' retirement account, the judicial retirement administrative account, the judicial retirement principal account, the limited fish and wildlife account, the local leasehold excise tax account, the local real estate excise tax account, the local sales and use tax account, the marine resources stewardship trust account, the medical aid account, the money-purchase retirement savings administrative account, the money-purchase retirement savings principal account, the motor vehicle fund, the motorcycle safety education account, the move ahead WA account, the move ahead WA flexible account, the multimodal transportation account, the multiuse roadway safety account, the municipal criminal justice assistance account, the oyster reserve land account, the pension funding stabilization account, the perpetual surveillance and maintenance account, the pilotage account, the pollution liability insurance agency underground storage tank revolving account, the public employees' retirement system plan 1 account, the public employees' retirement system combined plan 2 and plan 3 account, the public facilities construction loan revolving account, the public health supplemental account, the public works assistance account, the Puget Sound capital construction account, the Puget Sound ferry operations account, the Puget Sound Gateway facility account, the Puget Sound taxpayer accountability account, the real estate appraiser commission account, the recreational vehicle account, the regional mobility grant program account, the resource management cost account, the rural arterial trust account, the rural mobility grant program account, the rural Washington loan fund, the sexual assault prevention and response account, the site closure account, the skilled nursing facility safety net trust fund, the small city pavement and sidewalk account, the special category C account, the special wildlife account, the state investment board expense account, the state investment board commingled trust fund accounts, the state patrol highway account, the state reclamation revolving account, the state route number 520 civil penalties account, the state route number 520 corridor account, the statewide broadband account, the statewide tourism marketing account, the supplemental pension account, the Tacoma Narrows toll bridge account, the teachers' retirement system plan 1 account, the teachers' retirement system combined plan 2 and plan 3 account, the tobacco prevention and control account, the tobacco settlement account, the toll facility bond retirement account, the transportation 2003 account (nickel account), the transportation equipment fund, the transportation future funding program account, the transportation improvement account, the transportation improvement board bond retirement account, the transportation infrastructure account, the transportation partnership account, the traumatic brain injury account, the University of Washington bond retirement fund, the University of Washington building account, the voluntary cleanup account, the volunteer firefighters' and reserve officers' relief and pension principal fund, the volunteer firefighters' and reserve officers' administrative fund, the vulnerable roadway user education account, the Washington judicial retirement system account, the Washington law enforcement officers' and firefighters' system plan 1 retirement account, the Washington law enforcement officers' and firefighters' system plan 2 retirement account, the Washington public safety employees' plan 2 retirement account, the Washington school employees' retirement system combined plan 2 and 3 account, the Washington state patrol retirement account, the Washington State University building account, the Washington State University bond retirement fund, the water pollution control revolving administration account, the water pollution control revolving fund, the Western Washington University capital projects account, the Yakima integrated plan implementation account, the Yakima integrated plan implementation revenue recovery account, and the Yakima integrated plan implementation taxable bond account. Earnings derived from investing balances of the agricultural permanent fund, the normal school permanent fund, the permanent common school fund, the scientific permanent fund, and the state university permanent fund shall be allocated to their respective beneficiary accounts.

    b. Any state agency that has independent authority over accounts or funds not statutorily required to be held in the state treasury that deposits funds into a fund or account in the state treasury pursuant to an agreement with the office of the state treasurer shall receive its proportionate share of earnings based upon each account's or fund's average daily balance for the period.

5. In conformance with Article II, section 37 of the state Constitution, no treasury accounts or funds shall be allocated earnings without the specific affirmative directive of this section.

## Section 5
1. All earnings of investments of surplus balances in the state treasury shall be deposited to the treasury income account, which account is hereby established in the state treasury.

2. The treasury income account shall be utilized to pay or receive funds associated with federal programs as required by the federal cash management improvement act of 1990. The treasury income account is subject in all respects to chapter 43.88 RCW, but no appropriation is required for refunds or allocations of interest earnings required by the cash management improvement act. Refunds of interest to the federal treasury required under the cash management improvement act fall under RCW 43.88.180 and shall not require appropriation. The office of financial management shall determine the amounts due to or from the federal government pursuant to the cash management improvement act. The office of financial management may direct transfers of funds between accounts as deemed necessary to implement the provisions of the cash management improvement act, and this subsection. Refunds or allocations shall occur prior to the distributions of earnings set forth in subsection (4) of this section.

3. Except for the provisions of RCW 43.84.160, the treasury income account may be utilized for the payment of purchased banking services on behalf of treasury funds including, but not limited to, depository, safekeeping, and disbursement functions for the state treasury and affected state agencies. The treasury income account is subject in all respects to chapter 43.88 RCW, but no appropriation is required for payments to financial institutions. Payments shall occur prior to distribution of earnings set forth in subsection (4) of this section.

4. Monthly, the state treasurer shall distribute the earnings credited to the treasury income account. The state treasurer shall credit the general fund with all the earnings credited to the treasury income account except:

    a. The following accounts and funds shall receive their proportionate share of earnings based upon each account's and fund's average daily balance for the period: The abandoned recreational vehicle disposal account, the aeronautics account, the Alaskan Way viaduct replacement project account, the brownfield redevelopment trust fund account, the budget stabilization account, the capital vessel replacement account, the capitol building construction account, the Central Washington University capital projects account, the charitable, educational, penal and reformatory institutions account, the Chehalis basin account, the Chehalis basin taxable account, the cleanup settlement account, the climate active transportation account, the climate transit programs account, the Columbia river basin water supply development account, the Columbia river basin taxable bond water supply development account, the Columbia river basin water supply revenue recovery account, the common school construction fund, the community forest trust account, the connecting Washington account, the county arterial preservation account, the county criminal justice assistance account, the deferred compensation administrative account, the deferred compensation principal account, the department of licensing services account, the department of retirement systems expense account, the developmental disabilities community services account, the diesel idle reduction account, the drinking water assistance account, the administrative subaccount of the drinking water assistance account, the early learning facilities development account, the early learning facilities revolving account, the Eastern Washington University capital projects account, the education construction fund, the education legacy trust account, the election account, the electric vehicle account, the energy freedom account, the energy recovery act account, the essential rail assistance account, The Evergreen State College capital projects account, the fair start for kids account, the ferry bond retirement fund, the fish, wildlife, and conservation account, the freight mobility investment account, the freight mobility multimodal account, the grade crossing protective fund, the public health services account, the state higher education construction account, the higher education construction account, the higher education retirement plan supplemental benefit fund, the highway bond retirement fund, the highway infrastructure account, the highway safety fund, the hospital safety net assessment fund, the indigent impound account, the Interstate 405 and state route number 167 express toll lanes account, the judges' retirement account, the judicial retirement administrative account, the judicial retirement principal account, the limited fish and wildlife account, the local leasehold excise tax account, the local real estate excise tax account, the local sales and use tax account, the marine resources stewardship trust account, the medical aid account, the money-purchase retirement savings administrative account, the money-purchase retirement savings principal account, the motor vehicle fund, the motorcycle safety education account, the move ahead WA account, the move ahead WA flexible account, the multimodal transportation account, the multiuse roadway safety account, the municipal criminal justice assistance account, the oyster reserve land account, the pension funding stabilization account, the perpetual surveillance and maintenance account, the pilotage account, the pollution liability insurance agency underground storage tank revolving account, the public employees' retirement system plan 1 account, the public employees' retirement system combined plan 2 and plan 3 account, the public facilities construction loan revolving account, the public health supplemental account, the public works assistance account, the Puget Sound capital construction account, the Puget Sound ferry operations account, the Puget Sound Gateway facility account, the Puget Sound taxpayer accountability account, the real estate appraiser commission account, the recreational vehicle account, the regional mobility grant program account, the resource management cost account, the rural arterial trust account, the rural mobility grant program account, the rural Washington loan fund, the sexual assault prevention and response account, the site closure account, the skilled nursing facility safety net trust fund, the small city pavement and sidewalk account, the special category C account, the special wildlife account, the state investment board expense account, the state investment board commingled trust fund accounts, the state patrol highway account, the state reclamation revolving account, the state route number 520 civil penalties account, the state route number 520 corridor account, the statewide broadband account, the statewide tourism marketing account, the supplemental pension account, the Tacoma Narrows toll bridge account, the teachers' retirement system plan 1 account, the teachers' retirement system combined plan 2 and plan 3 account, the tobacco prevention and control account, the tobacco settlement account, the toll facility bond retirement account, the transportation 2003 account (nickel account), the transportation equipment fund, the transportation future funding program account, the transportation improvement account, the transportation improvement board bond retirement account, the transportation infrastructure account, the transportation partnership account, the traumatic brain injury account, the University of Washington bond retirement fund, the University of Washington building account, the voluntary cleanup account, the volunteer firefighters' and reserve officers' relief and pension principal fund, the volunteer firefighters' and reserve officers' administrative fund, the vulnerable roadway user education account, the Washington judicial retirement system account, the Washington law enforcement officers' and firefighters' system plan 1 retirement account, the Washington law enforcement officers' and firefighters' system plan 2 retirement account, the Washington public safety employees' plan 2 retirement account, the Washington school employees' retirement system combined plan 2 and 3 account, the Washington state patrol retirement account, the Washington State University building account, the Washington State University bond retirement fund, the water pollution control revolving administration account, the water pollution control revolving fund, the Western Washington University capital projects account, the Yakima integrated plan implementation account, the Yakima integrated plan implementation revenue recovery account, and the Yakima integrated plan implementation taxable bond account. Earnings derived from investing balances of the agricultural permanent fund, the normal school permanent fund, the permanent common school fund, the scientific permanent fund, and the state university permanent fund shall be allocated to their respective beneficiary accounts.

    b. Any state agency that has independent authority over accounts or funds not statutorily required to be held in the state treasury that deposits funds into a fund or account in the state treasury pursuant to an agreement with the office of the state treasurer shall receive its proportionate share of earnings based upon each account's or fund's average daily balance for the period.

5. In conformance with Article II, section 37 of the state Constitution, no treasury accounts or funds shall be allocated earnings without the specific affirmative directive of this section.

## Section 6
Sections 1 through 4 of this act take effect January 1, 2024.

## Section 7
Section 4 of this act expires July 1, 2024.

## Section 8
Section 5 of this act takes effect July 1, 2024.
