# 70.100 - Eye protection—Public and private educational institutions.
* [70.100.010 - "Eye protection areas" defined.](#70100010---eye-protection-areas-defined)
* [70.100.020 - Wearing of eye protection devices required—Furnishing of—Costs.](#70100020---wearing-of-eye-protection-devices-requiredfurnishing-ofcosts)
* [70.100.030 - Standard requirement for eye protection devices.](#70100030---standard-requirement-for-eye-protection-devices)
* [70.100.040 - Superintendent of public instruction to circulate instruction manual to public and private educational institutions.](#70100040---superintendent-of-public-instruction-to-circulate-instruction-manual-to-public-and-private-educational-institutions)
## 70.100.010 - "Eye protection areas" defined.
As used in this chapter:

"Eye protection areas" means areas within vocational or industrial arts shops, science or other school laboratories, or schools within state institutional facilities as designated by the state superintendent of public instruction in which activities take place involving:

1. Hot molten metals or other molten materials;

2. Milling, sawing, turning, shaping, cutting, grinding, or stamping of any solid materials;

3. Heat treatment, tempering or kiln firing of any metal or other materials;

4. Gas or electric arc welding, or other forms of welding processes;

5. Corrosive, caustic, or explosive materials;

6. Custodial or other service activity potentially hazardous to the eye: PROVIDED, That nothing in this chapter shall supersede regulations heretofore or hereafter established by the department of labor and industries respecting such activity; or

7. Any other activity or operation involving mechanical or manual work in any area that is potentially hazardous to the eye.

\[ [1969 ex.s. c 179 § 1](https://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1969ex1c179.pdf?cite=1969%20ex.s.%20c%20179%20§%201); \]

## 70.100.020 - Wearing of eye protection devices required—Furnishing of—Costs.
Every person shall wear eye protection devices when participating in, observing, or performing any function in connection with any courses or activities taking place in eye protection areas of any private or public school, college, university, or other public or private educational institution in this state, as designated by the superintendent of public instruction. The governing board or authority of any public school shall furnish the eye protection devices prescribed in RCW 70.100.030 without cost to all teachers and students in grades K-12 engaged in activities potentially dangerous to the human eye, and the governing body of each institution of higher education and vocational technical institute shall furnish such eye protection devices free or at cost to all teachers and students similarly engaged at the institutions of higher education and vocational technical institutes. Eye protection devices shall be furnished on a loan basis to all visitors observing activities hazardous to the eye.

\[ [1969 ex.s. c 179 § 2](https://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1969ex1c179.pdf?cite=1969%20ex.s.%20c%20179%20§%202); \]

## 70.100.030 - Standard requirement for eye protection devices.
Eye protection devices, which shall include plano safety spectacles, plastic face shields or goggles, shall comply with the U.S.A. Standard Practice for Occupational and Educational Eye and Face Protection, Z87.1-1968 or later revisions thereof.

\[ [1969 ex.s. c 179 § 3](https://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1969ex1c179.pdf?cite=1969%20ex.s.%20c%20179%20§%203); \]

## 70.100.040 - Superintendent of public instruction to circulate instruction manual to public and private educational institutions.
The superintendent of public instruction, after consulting with the department of labor and industries, and the division of vocational education shall prepare and circulate to each public and private educational institution in this state within six months of the date of passage of this chapter, a manual containing instructions and recommendations for the guidance of such institutions in implementing the eye safety provisions of this chapter.

\[ [1969 ex.s. c 179 § 4](https://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1969ex1c179.pdf?cite=1969%20ex.s.%20c%20179%20§%204); \]

