[wa-law.org](/) > [bill](/bill/) > [2023-24](/bill/2023-24/) > [HB 1858](/bill/2023-24/hb/1858/) > [Original Bill](/bill/2023-24/hb/1858/1/)

# HB 1858 - Naval Academy license plates

[Source](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/2023-24/Pdf/Bills/House%20Bills/1858.pdf)

## Section 1
In addition to all fees and taxes required to be paid upon application for a vehicle registration in chapter 46.16A RCW, the holder of a special license plate shall pay the appropriate special license plate fee as listed in this section.

## Section 2
(1) Special license plate series reviewed and approved by the department:

## Section 3
(1) The department shall:

## Section 4
1. The veterans stewardship account is created in the custody of the state treasurer. Disbursements of funds must be on the authorization of the director or the director's designee, and only for the purposes stated in subsection (4) of this section. In order to maintain an effective expenditure and revenue control, funds are subject in all respects to chapter 43.88 RCW, but no appropriation is required to permit expenditure of the funds.

2. The department may request and accept nondedicated contributions, grants, or gifts in cash or otherwise, including funds generated by the issuance of the armed forces license plate collection and the United States Naval Academy license plate under chapter 46.18 RCW.

3. All receipts from the sale of armed forces license plates, United States Naval Academy license plates, and Purple Heart license plates as required under RCW 46.68.425(2) must be deposited into the veterans stewardship account.

4. All moneys deposited into the veterans stewardship account must be used by the department for activities that benefit veterans or their families, including but not limited to, providing programs and services for homeless veterans; establishing memorials honoring veterans; and maintaining a future state veterans' cemetery. Funds from the account may not be used to supplant existing funds received by the department. For the 2019-2021 fiscal biennium, moneys deposited into the veterans stewardship account may be used for the department's traumatic brain injury program.

## Section 5
"United States Naval Academy license plates" mean special license plates issued under RCW 46.18.200 that display a design related to the United States Naval Academy.

## Section 6
This act takes effect November 1, 2023.
