# Engrossed Substitute House Bill 1529 - Session Law Chapter 136 Year 2021 as Recommended by Transportation

[Source](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/2021-22/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/House/1529-S.SL.pdf)
## Section 1
> This section modifies existing section [47.56.876](/rcw/47_public_highways_and_transportation/47.56_state_toll_bridges_tunnels_and_ferries.md). Here is the [modified chapter](rcw/47_public_highways_and_transportation/47.56_state_toll_bridges_tunnels_and_ferries.md) for context.

1. A special account to be known as the state route number 520 civil penalties account is created in the state treasury. All state route number 520 bridge replacement and HOV program civil penalties generated from the nonpayment of tolls on the state route number 520 corridor must be deposited into the account, as provided under RCW 47.56.870(4)(b)(vii). Moneys in the account may be spent only after appropriation. Expenditures from the account **must** be used to fund **legal obligations associated with bonds and loans associated with the construction and operation of state route number 520 under circumstances where the toll revenue collections at the time are not sufficient to fully cover such legal obligations, and then may be used to fund** any project within the state route number 520 bridge replacement and HOV program, including mitigation. During the 2013-2015 and 2015-2017 fiscal biennia, the legislature may transfer from the state route number 520 civil penalties account to the state route number 520 corridor account such amounts as reflect the excess fund balance of the state route number 520 civil penalties account. Funds transferred must be used solely for capital expenditures for the state route number 520 bridge replacement and HOV project. **The** legislature may direct the state treasurer to make transfers of moneys in the state route number 520 civil penalties account to the state route number 520 corridor account.

2. **For purposes of this section, "legal obligations associated with bonds and loans" includes, but is not limited to, debt service and all other activities necessary to comply with financial covenants associated with state route number 520, costs associated with the civil penalties program, and operation and maintenance costs.**

