# Senate Bill 5301

[Source](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/2021-22/Xml/Bills/Senate%20Bills/5301.xml)
## Section 1
(1) The legislature declares its specific intent to dedicate any savings generated by legislation on sentencing changes enacted during the 2021-2023 fiscal biennium, including changes to tolling House Bill No. 1126, the graduated reentry program Senate Bill No. 5121, earned early release, and sentencing alternatives, to a special account to be used for purposes specified in section 2 of this act.
(2) This section expires June 30, 2023.

## Section 2
(1) The corrections and public safety account is created in the custody of the state treasurer to be used only for the purposes of this section.
(2) Expenditures from the account may be used only for:
(a) Replacing the offender management network information system maintained by the department of corrections with a more efficient and technologically advanced system; and
(b) Implementing a comprehensive electronic health records system at the department of corrections.
(3) It is the express intent of the legislature that moneys in the corrections and public safety account may not be transferred to any other account or spent for any purposes other than provided under this section.
(4) Revenues to the corrections and public safety account consist of:
(a) Funds transferred to the account pursuant to this act; and
(b) Any other revenues appropriated to or deposited into the account.
(5)(a) For the 2021-2023 fiscal biennium, the state treasurer shall transfer any savings generated by sentencing changes enacted during the 2021-2023 fiscal biennium from the general fund to the corrections and public safety account.
(b) Moneys transferred to the corrections and public safety account in (a) of this subsection may only be used by the department of corrections for the purposes of subsection (2) of this section.
(c) Moneys in the account as referenced in (a) of this subsection may be spent only after appropriation.
(6) Moneys appropriated to the corrections and public safety account may not be used to supplant existing funding or levels of service.
(7) If the account balance in the corrections and public safety account exceeds $25,000,000 at any time, the amount in excess of $25,000,000 shall be transferred to the state general fund.
(8) During the 2021-2023 fiscal biennium, any residue in the account shall be accumulated and shall not revert to the general fund until the end of the biennium.
(9) This section expires June 30, 2023.
