# House Bill 1923

[Source](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/2021-22/Pdf/Bills/House%20Bills/1923.pdf)
## Section 1
> This section modifies existing section [13.34.050](/rcw/13_juvenile_courts_and_juvenile_offenders/13.34_juvenile_court_act—dependency_and_termination_of_parent-child_relationship.md). Here is the [modified chapter](rcw/13_juvenile_courts_and_juvenile_offenders/13.34_juvenile_court_act—dependency_and_termination_of_parent-child_relationship.md) for context.

1. The court may enter an order directing a law enforcement officer, probation counselor, or child protective services official to take a child into custody if: (a) A petition is filed with the juvenile court with sufficient corroborating evidence to establish that the child is dependent; (b) the allegations contained in the petition, if true, establish **by a preponderance of the evidence** that removal is necessary to prevent imminent physical harm to the child due to child abuse or neglect, including that which results from sexual abuse, sexual exploitation, or a pattern of severe neglect; and (c) an affidavit or declaration is filed by the department in support of the petition setting forth specific factual information evidencing insufficient time to serve a parent with a dependency petition and hold a hearing prior to removal.

2. Any petition that does not have the necessary affidavit or declaration demonstrating a risk of imminent harm requires that the parents are provided notice and an opportunity to be heard before the order may be entered.

3. The petition and supporting documentation must be served on the parent, and if the child is in custody at the time the child is removed, on the entity with custody other than the parent. If the court orders that a child be taken into custody under subsection (1) of this section, the petition and supporting documentation must be served on the parent at the time of the child's removal unless, after diligent efforts, the parents cannot be located at the time of removal. If the parent is not served at the time of removal, the department shall make diligent efforts to personally serve the parent. Failure to effect service does not invalidate the petition if service was attempted and the parent could not be found.


## Section 2
> This section modifies existing section [13.34.060](/rcw/13_juvenile_courts_and_juvenile_offenders/13.34_juvenile_court_act—dependency_and_termination_of_parent-child_relationship.md). Here is the [modified chapter](rcw/13_juvenile_courts_and_juvenile_offenders/13.34_juvenile_court_act—dependency_and_termination_of_parent-child_relationship.md) for context.

1. A child taken into custody pursuant to RCW 13.34.050 or 26.44.050 shall be immediately placed in shelter care. A child taken by a relative of the child in violation of RCW 9A.40.060 or 9A.40.070 shall be placed in shelter care only when permitted under RCW 13.34.055. No child may be held longer than **24** hours, excluding Saturdays, Sundays, and holidays, after such child is taken into custody unless a court order has been entered for continued shelter care. In no case may a child who is taken into custody pursuant to RCW 13.34.055, 13.34.050, or 26.44.050 be detained in a secure detention facility.

2. Unless there is reasonable cause based on specific evidence to believe that the health, safety, or welfare of the child would be jeopardized or that the efforts to reunite the parent and child will be hindered, priority placement for a child in shelter care, pending a court hearing, shall be with any person described in RCW 74.15.020(2)(a) or 13.34.130(1)(b). The person must be willing and available to care for the child and be able to meet any special needs of the child and the court must complete the inquiry required under RCW 13.34.065 to establish whether continued placement with the relative is appropriate. The person must be willing to facilitate the child's visitation with siblings, if such visitation is part of the department's plan or is ordered by the court. If a child is not initially placed with a relative or other suitable person requested by the parent pursuant to this section, the department shall make continuing efforts to place the child with a relative or other suitable person requested by the parent on the next business day after the child is taken into custody. The department shall document its effort to place the child with a relative or other suitable person requested by the parent pursuant to this section. Nothing within this subsection (2) establishes an entitlement to services or a right to a particular placement.

3. Whenever a child is taken into custody pursuant to this section, the department may authorize evaluations of the child's physical or emotional condition, routine medical and dental examination and care, and all necessary emergency care, after informing the child's parent, guardian, or legal custodian, unless the parent, guardian, or legal custodian cannot be reached. The child's parent, guardian, or legal custodian must be provided the opportunity to attend any appointments authorized under this subsection, unless prohibited by court order.


## Section 4
> This section modifies existing section [26.44.056](/rcw/26_domestic_relations/26.44_abuse_of_children.md). Here is the [modified chapter](rcw/26_domestic_relations/26.44_abuse_of_children.md) for context.

1. An administrator of a hospital or similar institution or any physician, licensed pursuant to chapters 18.71 or 18.57 RCW, may detain a child without consent of a person legally responsible for the child whether or not medical treatment is required, if there is probable cause to believe that detaining the child is necessary to prevent imminent physical harm to the child due to child abuse or neglect, including that which results from sexual abuse, sexual exploitation, or a pattern of severe neglect, and the child would be seriously injured or could not be taken into custody if it were necessary to first obtain a court order under RCW 13.34.050: PROVIDED, That such administrator or physician shall notify or cause to be notified the appropriate law enforcement agency or child protective services pursuant to RCW 26.44.040. Such notification shall be made as soon as possible and in no case longer than **24** hours. Such temporary protective custody by an administrator or doctor shall not be deemed an arrest. Child protective services may detain the child until the court assumes custody, but in no case longer than **24** hours, excluding Saturdays, Sundays, and holidays.

2. A child protective services employee, an administrator, doctor, or law enforcement officer shall not be held liable in any civil action for the decision for taking the child into custody, if done in good faith under this section.

