# 28A.215 - Early childhood, preschools, and before-and-after school care.
* [28A.215.010 - Authority of school boards.](#28a215010---authority-of-school-boards)
* [28A.215.020 - Allocations of state or federal funds—Rules.](#28a215020---allocations-of-state-or-federal-fundsrules)
* [28A.215.030 - Allocations pending receipt of federal funds.](#28a215030---allocations-pending-receipt-of-federal-funds)
* [28A.215.040 - Establishment and maintenance discretionary.](#28a215040---establishment-and-maintenance-discretionary)
* [28A.215.050 - Additional authority—Contracts with private and public entities—Charges—Transportation services.](#28a215050---additional-authoritycontracts-with-private-and-public-entitieschargestransportation-services)
* [28A.215.060 - Community learning center program—Purpose—Grants—Reports.](#28a215060---community-learning-center-programpurposegrantsreports)
* [28A.215.070 - Condensed compliance reports—Second-class districts.](#28a215070---condensed-compliance-reportssecond-class-districts)
* [28A.215.080 - Washington academic, innovation, and mentoring program.](#28a215080---washington-academic-innovation-and-mentoring-program)
## 28A.215.010 - Authority of school boards.
The board of directors of any school district shall have the power to establish and maintain preschools and to provide before-and-after-school and vacation care in connection with the common schools of said district located at such points as the board shall deem most suitable for the convenience of the public, for the care and instruction of infants and children residing in said district. The board shall establish such courses, activities, rules, and regulations governing preschools and before-and-after-school care as it may deem best: PROVIDED, That these courses and activities shall meet the minimum standard for such preschools as established by the United States department of health, education and welfare, or its successor agency, and the superintendent of public instruction. Except as otherwise provided by state or federal law, the board of directors may fix a reasonable charge for the care and instruction of children attending such schools. The board may, if necessary, supplement such funds as are received for the superintendent of public instruction or any agency of the federal government, by an appropriation from the general school fund of the district.

\[ [2006 c 263 § 410](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/2005-06/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/House/3098-S2.SL.pdf?cite=2006%20c%20263%20§%20410); [1995 c 335 § 104](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/1995-96/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/Senate/5169-S.SL.pdf?cite=1995%20c%20335%20§%20104); [1969 ex.s. c 223 § 28A.34.010](http://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1969ex1c223.pdf?cite=1969%20ex.s.%20c%20223%20§%2028A.34.010); [1945 c 247 § 1](http://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1945c247.pdf?cite=1945%20c%20247%20§%201); [1943 c 220 § 1](http://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1943c220.pdf?cite=1943%20c%20220%20§%201); Rem. Supp. 1945 § 5109-1; \]

## 28A.215.020 - Allocations of state or federal funds—Rules.
Expenditures under federal funds and/or state appropriations made to carry out the purposes of RCW 28A.215.010 through 28A.215.050 shall be made by warrants issued by the state treasurer upon order of the superintendent of public instruction. The superintendent of public instruction shall make necessary rules to carry out the purpose of RCW 28A.215.010. The superintendent shall consult with the department of children, youth, and families when establishing relevant rules.

\[ [2017 3rd sp.s. c 6 § 218](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/2017-18/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/House/1661-S2.SL.pdf?cite=2017%203rd%20sp.s.%20c%206%20§%20218); [2006 c 263 § 411](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/2005-06/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/House/3098-S2.SL.pdf?cite=2006%20c%20263%20§%20411); [1995 c 335 § 308](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/1995-96/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/Senate/5169-S.SL.pdf?cite=1995%20c%20335%20§%20308); [1990 c 33 § 210](http://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1990c33.pdf?cite=1990%20c%2033%20§%20210); [1969 ex.s. c 223 § 28A.34.020](http://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1969ex1c223.pdf?cite=1969%20ex.s.%20c%20223%20§%2028A.34.020); [1943 c 220 § 2](http://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1943c220.pdf?cite=1943%20c%20220%20§%202); Rem. Supp. 1943 § 5109-2; \]

## 28A.215.030 - Allocations pending receipt of federal funds.
In the event the legislature appropriates any moneys to carry out the purposes of RCW 28A.215.010 through 28A.215.050, allocations therefrom may be made to school districts for the purpose of underwriting allocations made or requested from federal funds until such federal funds are available. Any school district may allocate a portion of its funds for the purpose of carrying out the provisions of RCW 28A.215.010 through 28A.215.050 pending the receipt of reimbursement from funds made available by acts of congress.

\[ [1995 c 335 § 309](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/1995-96/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/Senate/5169-S.SL.pdf?cite=1995%20c%20335%20§%20309); [1990 c 33 § 211](http://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1990c33.pdf?cite=1990%20c%2033%20§%20211); [1969 ex.s. c 223 § 28A.34.040](http://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1969ex1c223.pdf?cite=1969%20ex.s.%20c%20223%20§%2028A.34.040); [1943 c 220 § 3](http://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1943c220.pdf?cite=1943%20c%20220%20§%203); Rem. Supp. 1943 § 5109-3; \]

## 28A.215.040 - Establishment and maintenance discretionary.
Every board of directors shall have power to establish, equip and maintain preschools and/or provide before-and-after-school care for children of working parents, in cooperation with the federal government or any of its agencies, when in their judgment the best interests of their district will be subserved thereby.

\[ [1995 c 335 § 105](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/1995-96/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/Senate/5169-S.SL.pdf?cite=1995%20c%20335%20§%20105); [1973 1st ex.s. c 154 § 45](http://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1973ex1c154.pdf?cite=1973%201st%20ex.s.%20c%20154%20§%2045); [1969 ex.s. c 223 § 28A.34.050](http://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1969ex1c223.pdf?cite=1969%20ex.s.%20c%20223%20§%2028A.34.050); [1943 c 220 § 5](http://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1943c220.pdf?cite=1943%20c%20220%20§%205); Rem. Supp. 1943 § 5109-5; \]

## 28A.215.050 - Additional authority—Contracts with private and public entities—Charges—Transportation services.
As a supplement to the authority otherwise granted by RCW 28A.215.010 through 28A.215.050 respecting the care or instruction, or both, of children in general, the board of directors of any school district may only utilize funds outside the state basic education appropriation and the state school transportation appropriation to:

1. Contract with public and private entities to conduct all or any portion of the management and operation of a child care program at a school district site or elsewhere;

2. Establish charges based upon costs incurred under this section and provide for the reduction or waiver of charges in individual cases based upon the financial ability of the parents or legal guardians of enrolled children to pay the charges, or upon their provision of other valuable consideration to the school district; and

3. Transport children enrolled in a child care program to the program and to related sites using district-owned school buses and other motor vehicles, or by contracting for such transportation and related services: PROVIDED, That no child three years of age or younger shall be transported under the provisions of this section unless accompanied by a parent or guardian.

\[ [1995 c 335 § 310](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/1995-96/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/Senate/5169-S.SL.pdf?cite=1995%20c%20335%20§%20310); [1990 c 33 § 212](http://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1990c33.pdf?cite=1990%20c%2033%20§%20212); [1987 c 487 § 1](http://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1987c487.pdf?cite=1987%20c%20487%20§%201); \]

## 28A.215.060 - Community learning center program—Purpose—Grants—Reports.
1. The Washington community learning center program is established. The program shall be administered by the office of the superintendent of public instruction. The purposes of the program include:

   a. Supporting the creation or expansion of community learning centers that provide students with tutoring and educational enrichment when school is not in session;

   b. Providing training and professional development for community learning center program staff;

   c. Increasing public awareness of the availability and benefits of after-school programs; and

   d. Supporting statewide after-school intermediary organizations in their efforts to provide leadership, coordination, technical assistance, professional development, advocacy, and programmatic support to the Washington community learning center programs and after-school programs throughout the state.

2. [Empty]

   a. Subject to funds appropriated for this purpose, the office of the superintendent of public instruction may provide community learning center grants to any public or private organization that meets the eligibility criteria of the federal twenty-first century community learning centers program.

   b. Priority may be given to grant requests submitted jointly by one or more schools or school districts and one or more community-based organizations or other nonschool partners.

   c. Priority may also be given to grant requests for after-school programs focusing on improving mathematics achievement, particularly for middle and junior high school students.

   d. Priority shall be given to grant requests that:

      i. Focus on improving reading and mathematics proficiency for students who attend schools that have been identified as being in need of improvement under section 1116 of Title I of the federal no child left behind act of 2001; and

      ii. Include a public/private partnership agreement or proposal for how to provide free transportation for those students in need that are involved in the program.

3. Community learning center grant funds may be used to carry out a broad array of out-of-school activities that support and enhance academic achievement. The activities may include but need not be limited to:

   a. Remedial and academic enrichment;

   b. Mathematics, reading, and science education;

   c. Arts and music education;

   d. Entrepreneurial education;

   e. Community service;

   f. Tutoring and mentoring programs;

   g. Programs enhancing the language skills and academic achievement of limited English proficient students;

   h. Recreational and athletic activities;

   i. Telecommunications and technology education;

   j. Programs that promote parental involvement and family literacy;

   k. Drug and violence prevention, counseling, and character education programs; and

   l. Programs that assist students who have been truant, suspended, or expelled, to improve their academic achievement.

4. Each community learning center grant may be made for a maximum of five years. Each grant recipient shall report annually to the office of the superintendent of public instruction on what transportation services are being used to assist students in accessing the program and how those services are being funded. Based on this information, the office of the superintendent of public instruction shall compile a list of transportation service options being used and make that list available to all after-school program providers that were eligible for the community learning center program grants.

5. To the extent that funding is available for this purpose, the office of the superintendent of public instruction may provide grants or other support for the training and professional development of community learning center staff, the activities of intermediary after-school organizations, and efforts to increase public awareness of the availability and benefits of after-school programs.

6. Schools or school districts that receive a community learning center grant under this section may seek approval from the office of the superintendent of public instruction for flexibility to use a portion of their state transportation funds for the costs of transporting students to and from the community learning center program.

7. The office of the superintendent of public instruction shall evaluate program outcomes and report to the governor and the education committees of the legislature on the outcomes of the grants and make recommendations related to program modification, sustainability, and possible expansion. An interim report is due November 1, 2008. A final report is due December 1, 2009.

\[ [2008 c 169 § 1](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/2007-08/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/Senate/6369.SL.pdf?cite=2008%20c%20169%20§%201); [2007 c 400 § 5](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/2007-08/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/Senate/5841-S2.SL.pdf?cite=2007%20c%20400%20§%205); \]

## 28A.215.070 - Condensed compliance reports—Second-class districts.
Any compliance reporting requirements as a result of laws in this chapter that apply to second-class districts may be submitted in accordance with RCW 28A.330.250.

\[ [2011 c 45 § 13](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/2011-12/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/Senate/5184-S.SL.pdf?cite=2011%20c%2045%20§%2013); \]

## 28A.215.080 - Washington academic, innovation, and mentoring program.
1. The Washington academic, innovation, and mentoring program is established.

2. The purpose of the program is to enable eligible neighborhood youth development entities to provide out-of-school time programs for youth ages six to eighteen years of age that include educational services, social-emotional learning, mentoring, and linkages to positive, prosocial leisure, and recreational activities. The programs must be designed for mentoring and academic enrichment.

3. Eligible entities must meet the following requirements:

   a. Ensure that sixty percent or more of the academic, innovation, and mentoring program participants must qualify for free or reduced-price lunch;

   b. Have an existing partnership with the school district and a commitment to develop a formalized data-sharing agreement;

   c. Be facility based;

   d. Combine, or have a plan to combine, academics and social-emotional learning;

   e. Engage in a continuous program quality improvement process;

   f. Conduct national criminal background checks for all employees and volunteers who work with children; and

   g. Have adopted standards for care including staff training, health and safety standards, and mechanisms for assessing and enforcing the program's compliance with the standards.

4. Nonprofit entities applying for funding as a statewide network must:

   a. Have an existing infrastructure or network of academic, innovation, and mentoring program grant-eligible entities;

   b. Provide after-school and summer programs with youth development services; and

   c. Provide proven and tested recreational, educational, and character-building programs for children ages six to eighteen years of age.

5. The office of the superintendent of public instruction must submit a report to the appropriate education and fiscal committees of the legislature by December 31, 2018, and an annual update by December 31 each year thereafter. The report must outline the programs established, target populations, and pretesting and posttesting results.

\[ [2017 c 180 § 1](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/2017-18/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/Senate/5258-S2.SL.pdf?cite=2017%20c%20180%20§%201); \]

