# 28A.625 - Awards.
* [28A.625.005 - Condensed compliance reports—Second-class districts.](#28a625005---condensed-compliance-reportssecond-class-districts)
* [28A.625.100 - Board of directors of a school district may establish.](#28a625100---board-of-directors-of-a-school-district-may-establish)
* [28A.625.110 - Awards.](#28a625110---awards)
* [28A.625.150 - Award program.](#28a625150---award-program)
## 28A.625.005 - Condensed compliance reports—Second-class districts.
Any compliance reporting requirements as a result of laws in this chapter that apply to second-class districts may be submitted in accordance with RCW 28A.330.250.

\[ [2011 c 45 § 48](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/2011-12/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/Senate/5184-S.SL.pdf?cite=2011%20c%2045%20§%2048); \]

## 28A.625.100 - Board of directors of a school district may establish.
The board of directors of any school district may establish and maintain an employee suggestion program to encourage and reward meritorious suggestions by certificated and classified school employees. The program shall be designed to promote efficiency or economy in the performance of any function of the school district. Each board establishing an employee suggestion program shall establish procedures for the proper administration of the program.

\[ [1986 c 143 § 1](https://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1986c143.pdf?cite=1986%20c%20143%20§%201); \]

## 28A.625.110 - Awards.
The board of directors of the school district shall make the final determination as to whether an employee suggestion award will be made and shall determine the nature and extent of the award. The award shall not be a regular or supplemental compensation program for all employees and the suggestion must, in fact, result in actual savings greater than the award amount. Any moneys which may be awarded to an employee as part of an employee suggestion program shall not be considered salary or compensation for the purposes of RCW 28A.400.200 or chapter 41.40 RCW.

\[ [1990 c 33 § 519](https://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1990c33.pdf?cite=1990%20c%2033%20§%20519); [1987 1st ex.s. c 2 § 207](https://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1987ex1c2.pdf?cite=1987%201st%20ex.s.%20c%202%20§%20207); [1986 c 143 § 2](https://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1986c143.pdf?cite=1986%20c%20143%20§%202); \]

## 28A.625.150 - Award program.
The board of directors of any school district may establish a commendable employee service and recognition award program for certificated and classified school employees. The program shall be designed to recognize exemplary service, special achievements, or outstanding contributions by an individual in the performance of his or her duties as an employee of the school district. The board of directors of the school district shall determine the extent and type of any nonmonetary award. The value of any nonmonetary award shall not be deemed salary or compensation for the purposes of RCW 28A.400.200 or chapter 41.32 RCW.

\[ [1990 c 33 § 520](https://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1990c33.pdf?cite=1990%20c%2033%20§%20520); [1987 1st ex.s. c 2 § 210](https://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1987ex1c2.pdf?cite=1987%201st%20ex.s.%20c%202%20§%20210); [1985 c 399 § 2](https://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1985c399.pdf?cite=1985%20c%20399%20§%202); \]

