# 28A.520 - Forest reserve funds distribution.
* [28A.520.010 - Distribution of forest reserve funds—Procedure—Proportional county area distribution, when.](#28a520010---distribution-of-forest-reserve-fundsprocedureproportional-county-area-distribution-when)
* [28A.520.020 - Distribution of forest reserve funds—Revolving account created—Use—Apportionments from—As affects basic education allocation.](#28a520020---distribution-of-forest-reserve-fundsrevolving-account-createduseapportionments-fromas-affects-basic-education-allocation)
* [28A.520.030 - Condensed compliance reports—Second-class districts.](#28a520030---condensed-compliance-reportssecond-class-districts)
## 28A.520.010 - Distribution of forest reserve funds—Procedure—Proportional county area distribution, when.
Of the moneys received by the state from the federal government in accordance with Title 16, section 500, United States Code, fifty percent shall be spent by the counties on public schools or public roads, and fifty percent shall be spent by the counties on public schools as provided in RCW 28A.520.020(2), or for any other purposes as now or hereafter authorized by federal law, in the counties in the United States forest reserve from which such moneys were received. Where the reserve is situated in more than one county, the state treasurer shall determine the proportional area of the counties therein. The state treasurer is authorized and required to obtain the necessary information to enable him or her to make that determination.

The state treasurer shall distribute to the counties, according to the determined proportional area, the money to be spent by the counties. The county legislative authority shall expend the fifty percent received by the county for the benefit of the public roads or public schools of the county, or for any other purposes as now or hereafter authorized by federal law.

\[ [1990 c 33 § 429](http://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1990c33.pdf?cite=1990%20c%2033%20§%20429); [1985 c 311 § 1](http://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1985c311.pdf?cite=1985%20c%20311%20§%201); [1982 c 126 § 1](http://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1982c126.pdf?cite=1982%20c%20126%20§%201); \]

## 28A.520.020 - Distribution of forest reserve funds—Revolving account created—Use—Apportionments from—As affects basic education allocation.
1. There shall be a fund known as the federal forest revolving account. The state treasurer, who shall be custodian of the revolving account, shall deposit into the revolving account the funds for each county received by the state in accordance with Title 16, section 500, United States Code. The state treasurer shall distribute these moneys to the counties according to the determined proportional area. The county legislative authority shall expend fifty percent of the money for the benefit of the public roads and other public purposes as authorized by federal statute or public schools of such county and not otherwise. Disbursements by the counties of the remaining fifty percent of the money shall be as authorized by the superintendent of public instruction, or the superintendent's designee, and shall occur in the manner provided in subsection (2) of this section.

2. No later than thirty days following receipt of the funds from the federal government, the superintendent of public instruction shall apportion moneys distributed to counties for schools to public school districts in the respective counties in proportion to the number of resident full-time equivalent students enrolled in each public school district to the number of resident full-time equivalent students enrolled in public schools in the county. In apportioning these funds, the superintendent of public instruction shall utilize the October enrollment count.

3. [Empty]

    a.  Except as provided in (b) of this subsection, if the amount received by any public school district pursuant to subsection (2) of this section is less than the basic education allocation to which the district would otherwise be entitled, the superintendent of public instruction shall apportion to the district, in the manner provided by RCW 28A.510.250, an amount which shall be the difference between the amount received pursuant to subsection (2) of this section and the basic education allocation to which the district would otherwise be entitled.

    b.  If a school district has a poverty level of at least fifty-seven percent, the superintendent may not offset that district's basic education allocation by the amount of those federal forest revenues, to the extent that such revenues do not exceed seventy thousand dollars. The superintendent may offset the district's basic education allocations by the portion of the federal forest revenues that exceeds seventy thousand dollars. For purposes of this section, poverty is measured by the percentage of students eligible for free and reduced-price lunch in the previous school year.

4. All federal forest funds shall be expended in accordance with the requirements of Title 16, section 500, United States Code, as now existing or hereafter amended.

5. The definition of resident student for purposes of this section shall be based on rules adopted by the superintendent of public instruction, which shall consider and address the impact of alternative learning experience students on federal forest funds distribution.

\[ [2014 c 155 § 2](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/2013-14/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/House/2207-S2.SL.pdf?cite=2014%20c%20155%20§%202); [2011 c 278 § 1](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/2011-12/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/Senate/5239-S.SL.pdf?cite=2011%20c%20278%20§%201); [1991 sp.s. c 13 § 113](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/1991-92/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/House/1058-S.SL.pdf?cite=1991%20sp.s.%20c%2013%20§%20113); [1990 c 33 § 430](http://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1990c33.pdf?cite=1990%20c%2033%20§%20430); [1985 c 311 § 2](http://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1985c311.pdf?cite=1985%20c%20311%20§%202); [1982 c 126 § 2](http://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1982c126.pdf?cite=1982%20c%20126%20§%202); \]

## 28A.520.030 - Condensed compliance reports—Second-class districts.
Any compliance reporting requirements as a result of laws in this chapter that apply to second-class districts may be submitted in accordance with RCW 28A.330.250.

\[ [2011 c 45 § 38](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/2011-12/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/Senate/5184-S.SL.pdf?cite=2011%20c%2045%20§%2038); \]

