# 28A.623 - Meal programs.
* [28A.623.005 - Condensed compliance reports—Second-class districts.](#28a623005---condensed-compliance-reportssecond-class-districts)
* [28A.623.010 - Nonprofit program for elderly—Purpose.](#28a623010---nonprofit-program-for-elderlypurpose)
* [28A.623.020 - Nonprofit program for elderly—Authorized—Restrictions.](#28a623020---nonprofit-program-for-elderlyauthorizedrestrictions)
* [28A.623.030 - Nonprofit program for certain children and students—Conditions and restrictions.](#28a623030---nonprofit-program-for-certain-children-and-studentsconditions-and-restrictions)
## 28A.623.005 - Condensed compliance reports—Second-class districts.
Any compliance reporting requirements as a result of laws in this chapter that apply to second-class districts may be submitted in accordance with RCW 28A.330.250.

\[ [2011 c 45 § 47](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/2011-12/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/Senate/5184-S.SL.pdf?cite=2011%20c%2045%20§%2047); \]

## 28A.623.010 - Nonprofit program for elderly—Purpose.
The legislature finds that many elderly persons suffer dietary deficiencies and malnutrition due to inadequate financial resources, immobility, lack of interest due to isolation and loneliness, and characteristics of the aging process, such as physiological, social, and psychological changes which result in a way of life too often leading to feelings of rejection, abandonment, and despair. There is a real need as a matter of public policy to provide the elderly citizens with adequate nutritionally sound meals, through which their isolation may be penetrated with the company and the social contacts of their own. It is the declared purpose of RCW 28A.235.120, 28A.623.010, and 28A.623.020 to raise the level of dignity of the aged population where their remaining years can be lived in a fulfillment equal to the benefits they have bestowed, the richness they have added, and the great part they have played in the life of our society and nation.

\[ [1990 c 33 § 511](https://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1990c33.pdf?cite=1990%20c%2033%20§%20511); [1973 c 107 § 1](https://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1973c107.pdf?cite=1973%20c%20107%20§%201); \]

## 28A.623.020 - Nonprofit program for elderly—Authorized—Restrictions.
The board of directors of any school district may establish or allow for the establishment of a nonprofit meal program for feeding elderly persons residing within the area served by such school district using school facilities, and may authorize the extension of any school food services for the purpose of feeding elderly persons, subject to the following conditions and restrictions:

1. The charge to such persons for each meal shall not exceed the actual cost of such meal to the school.

2. The program will utilize methods of administration which will assure that the maximum number of eligible individuals may have an opportunity to participate in such a program, and will coordinate, whenever possible, with the local area agency on aging.

3. Any nonprofit meal program established pursuant to RCW 28A.235.120, 28A.623.010, and 28A.623.020 may not be operated so as to interfere with the normal educational process within the schools.

4. No school district funds may be used for the operation of such a meal program.

5. For purposes of RCW 28A.235.120, 28A.623.010, and 28A.623.020, "elderly persons" shall mean persons who are at least sixty years of age.

\[ [1990 c 33 § 512](https://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1990c33.pdf?cite=1990%20c%2033%20§%20512); [1973 c 107 § 3](https://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1973c107.pdf?cite=1973%20c%20107%20§%203); \]

## 28A.623.030 - Nonprofit program for certain children and students—Conditions and restrictions.
The board of directors of any school district may establish or allow for the establishment of a nonprofit meal program using school facilities for feeding children who are participating in educational programs or activities conducted by private, nonprofit organizations and entities and students who are attending private elementary and secondary schools, and may authorize the extension of any school food services for the purpose of feeding such children and students, subject to the following conditions and restrictions:

1. The charge to such persons, organizations, entities or schools for each meal shall be not less than the actual cost of such meal to the school, inclusive of a reasonable charge for overhead and the value of the use of the facilities.

2. The meal program shall not be operated so as to interfere with the educational process within the school district.

3. The meal program shall not be operated so as to impair or reduce the provision of food services to students of the school districts.

\[ [1979 c 58 § 2](https://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1979c58.pdf?cite=1979%20c%2058%20§%202); \]

