# 28A.645 - Appeals from board.
* [28A.645.010 - Appeals—Notice of—Scope—Time limitation.](#28a645010---appealsnotice-ofscopetime-limitation)
* [28A.645.020 - Transcript filed, certified.](#28a645020---transcript-filed-certified)
* [28A.645.030 - Appeal to be heard de novo and expeditiously.](#28a645030---appeal-to-be-heard-de-novo-and-expeditiously)
* [28A.645.040 - Certified copy of decision to county assessor when school district boundaries changed.](#28a645040---certified-copy-of-decision-to-county-assessor-when-school-district-boundaries-changed)
## 28A.645.010 - Appeals—Notice of—Scope—Time limitation.
1. Any person, or persons, either severally or collectively, aggrieved by any decision or order of any school official or board, within thirty days after the rendition of such decision or order, or of the failure to act upon the same when properly presented, may appeal the same to the superior court of the county in which the school district or part thereof is situated, by filing with the secretary of the school board if the appeal is from board action or failure to act, otherwise with the proper school official, and filing with the clerk of the superior court, a notice of appeal which shall set forth in a clear and concise manner the errors complained of.

2. [Empty]

   a. Appeals by teachers, principals, supervisors, superintendents, or other certificated employees from the actions of school boards with respect to discharge or other action adversely affecting their contract status, or failure to renew their contracts for the next ensuing term shall be governed by the appeal provisions of chapters 28A.400 and 28A.405 RCW therefor and in all other cases shall be governed by chapter 28A.645 RCW.

   b. Appeals from nonrenewal or discharge by employees of school districts that are dissolved due to financial insolvency shall be as provided in RCW 28A.315.229.

\[ [2012 c 186 § 22](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/2011-12/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/House/2617-S.SL.pdf?cite=2012%20c%20186%20§%2022); [1990 c 33 § 544](https://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1990c33.pdf?cite=1990%20c%2033%20§%20544); [1971 ex.s. c 282 § 40](https://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1971ex1c282.pdf?cite=1971%20ex.s.%20c%20282%20§%2040); [1969 ex.s. c 34 § 17](https://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1969ex1c34.pdf?cite=1969%20ex.s.%20c%2034%20§%2017); [1969 ex.s. c 223 § 28A.88.010](https://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1969ex1c223.pdf?cite=1969%20ex.s.%20c%20223%20§%2028A.88.010); [1961 c 241 § 9](https://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1961c241.pdf?cite=1961%20c%20241%20§%209); 1909 c 97 p 362 § 1; RRS § 5064; \]

## 28A.645.020 - Transcript filed, certified.
Within twenty days of service of the notice of appeal, the school board, at its expense, or the school official, at such official's expense, shall file the complete transcript of the evidence and the papers and exhibits relating to the decision for which a complaint has been filed. Such filings shall be certified to be correct.

\[ [1971 ex.s. c 282 § 41](https://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1971ex1c282.pdf?cite=1971%20ex.s.%20c%20282%20§%2041); \]

## 28A.645.030 - Appeal to be heard de novo and expeditiously.
Any appeal to the superior court shall be heard de novo by the superior court. Such appeal shall be heard expeditiously.

\[ [1971 ex.s. c 282 § 42](https://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1971ex1c282.pdf?cite=1971%20ex.s.%20c%20282%20§%2042); \]

## 28A.645.040 - Certified copy of decision to county assessor when school district boundaries changed.
In cases of appeal resulting in the change of any school district boundaries the decision shall within five days thereafter be also certified by the proper officer to the county assessor of the county, or to the county assessors of the counties, wherein the territory may lie.

\[ [1969 ex.s. c 223 § 28A.88.090](https://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1969ex1c223.pdf?cite=1969%20ex.s.%20c%20223%20§%2028A.88.090); 1909 c 97 p 364 § 8; RRS § 5071; \]

