# 16.72 - Fur farming.
* [16.72.010 - Definitions.](#1672010---definitions)
* [16.72.020 - Quarantine controls.](#1672020---quarantine-controls)
* [16.72.030 - Fox, mink, marten declared personalty.](#1672030---fox-mink-marten-declared-personalty)
* [16.72.040 - Branding—Recording.](#1672040---brandingrecording)
## **16.72.010 - Definitions.**
**The definitions in this section apply throughout this chapter unless the context clearly requires otherwise.**

1. **"Fur" means any animal skin or part thereof with hair, fleece, or fur fibers attached thereto, either in its raw or processed state.**

2. "Fur farming" means breeding, raising**,** and rearing of mink, marten, fox**,** and chinchilla in captivity or enclosures.

3. [Empty]

    a. **"Fur product" means any article of clothing or covering for any part of the body, or any fashion accessory including, but not limited to, handbags, shoes, slippers, hats, earmuffs, scarves, shawls, gloves, jewelry, keychains, toys or trinkets, and home accessories and decor, that is made in whole or in part of fur.**

    b. **"Fur product" does not include any of the following:**

        i. **An animal skin or part thereof that is to be converted into leather, which in processing will have the hair, fleece, or fur fiber completely removed;**

        ii. **Cowhide with hair attached thereto;**

        iii. **Deerskin, sheepskin, or goatskin with hair attached thereto; and**

        iv. **The pelt or skin of an animal that is preserved through taxidermy.**

4. "Person" includes any individual, firm corporation, trust, association, copartnership, society, or other organization of individuals and any other business unit, device**,** or arrangement.

5. **"Produce or manufacture" means to engage in any activity related to processing raw materials to create a fur product for distribution or sale.**

6. **"Taxidermy" means the practice of preparing, stuffing, and mounting the skin, in lifelike form, of any fish, reptile, amphibian, bird, or mammal.**

7. **"Ultimate consumer" means a person who buys for their own use, or for the use of another, but not for resale or trade.**

8. **"Used fur product" means fur in any form that has been worn or used by an ultimate consumer.**

## 16.72.030 - Fox, mink, marten declared personalty.
All fox, mink and marten that have been lawfully imported or acquired, or bred or reared in captivity or enclosures, are declared to be personal property. Any person hereafter acquiring any such fur bearing animals in the wild state, shall within ten days furnish satisfactory proof to the director that such animals were lawfully obtained. Such wild animals shall not become personal property under the provisions of this section until such proof is furnished.

\[ [1955 c 321 § 4](http://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1955c321.pdf?cite=1955%20c%20321%20§%204); \]

## 16.72.040 - Branding—Recording.
The owners of any fox, mink, or marten may mark them by branding with tattoo or other marks for the purpose of identification, but no person shall be entitled to ownership in or rights under any particular branding marks unless and until the branding marks are recorded with the department in the same manner and with like effect as brands of other animals are recorded as provided in *chapter 16.56 RCW.

\[ [1955 c 321 § 5](http://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1955c321.pdf?cite=1955%20c%20321%20§%205); \]


## **16.72.XXX - TBD**
**
1. Except as provided in subsection (2) of this section, a person may neither participate in fur farming, nor produce or manufacture a fur product.

2. The prohibitions in this section do not apply to any of the following:

    a. A fur product used for religious purposes;

    b. A fur product used for traditional tribal, cultural, or spiritual purposes by a member of a federally recognized Native American tribe;

    c. Any activity expressly authorized by federal law; and

    d. A product where all of the fur used in its production is from a used fur product.

3. A person who sells or trades any used fur product or fur product described in subsection (2) of this section shall maintain a record of each sale or trade of one of those exempt fur products for at least one year. A violation of this subsection is not subject to a criminal or civil penalty.

4. Except for subsection (3) of this section, a person violating this section is guilty of a misdemeanor. Each fur product that constitutes a violation must be treated as a separate and distinct offense.


[ 2021 c XXX § 3; ]**

## **16.72.XXX - TBD**
**
1. The fur farm transition grant program is established in the department of agriculture. Subject to the availability of amounts appropriated for this specific purpose and as allowed by law, the purpose of the program is to help existing fur farmers impacted by this act transition out of fur farming. Grant funds may be used only for technical assistance, permitting, new facility construction, equipment, and labor costs associated with transitioning out of fur farming. The department of agriculture may adopt rules to carry out the grant program.

2. This section expires June 30, 2025.


[ 2021 c XXX § 4; ]**

## **16.72.XXX - TBD**
**
1. The fur farm transition account is created in the custody of the state treasurer. All receipts, any legislative appropriations, federal funds, private donations, or any other private or public source directed to the fur farm transition grant program must be deposited into the account. Expenditures from the account may be used only for the fur farm transition grant program established in section 4 of this act. Only the director of the department of agriculture or the director's designee may authorize expenditures from the account. The account is subject to allotment procedures under chapter 43.88 RCW, but an appropriation is not required for expenditures.

2. This section expires June 30, 2025.


[ 2021 c XXX § 5; ]**
