# 85.36 - Powers of special districts.
* [85.36.005 - Certain powers and rights governed by chapter  85.38 RCW.](#8536005---certain-powers-and-rights-governed-by-chapter--8538-rcw)
* [85.36.025 - Special assessments—Budgets—Alternative methods.](#8536025---special-assessmentsbudgetsalternative-methods)
* [85.36.040 - Special assessment bonds.](#8536040---special-assessment-bonds)
* [85.36.050 - Annexation of territory—Consolidation of special districts—Suspension of operations—Reactivation.](#8536050---annexation-of-territoryconsolidation-of-special-districtssuspension-of-operationsreactivation)
## 85.36.005 - Certain powers and rights governed by chapter  85.38 RCW.
Consolidated diking districts, drainage districts, diking improvement districts, and drainage improvement districts shall possess the authority and shall be created, district voting rights shall be determined, and district elections shall be held as provided in chapter 85.38 RCW.

\[ [1985 c 396 § 35](http://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1985c396.pdf?cite=1985%20c%20396%20§%2035); \]

## 85.36.025 - Special assessments—Budgets—Alternative methods.
RCW 85.38.140 through 85.38.170 constitute a mutually exclusive alternative method by which consolidated diking districts, drainage districts, diking improvement districts, and/or drainage improvement districts in existence as of July 28, 1985, may measure and impose special assessments and adopt budgets. RCW 85.38.150 through 85.38.170 constitute the exclusive method by which consolidated diking districts, drainage districts, diking improvement districts, and/or drainage improvement districts created after July 28, 1985, may measure and impose special assessments and adopt budgets.

\[ [1985 c 396 § 28](http://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1985c396.pdf?cite=1985%20c%20396%20§%2028); \]

## 85.36.040 - Special assessment bonds.
Special assessment bonds and notes shall be issued and sold in accordance with chapter 85.38 RCW.

\[ [1986 c 278 § 27](http://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1986c278.pdf?cite=1986%20c%20278%20§%2027); \]

## 85.36.050 - Annexation of territory—Consolidation of special districts—Suspension of operations—Reactivation.
Consolidated diking districts, drainage districts, diking improvement districts, and/or drainage improvement districts may annex territory, consolidate with other special districts, and have their operations suspended and be reactivated, in accordance with chapter 85.38 RCW.

\[ [1986 c 278 § 15](http://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1986c278.pdf?cite=1986%20c%20278%20§%2015); \]

