# 36.65 - Combined city and county municipal corporations.
* [36.65.010 - Intent.](#3665010---intent)
* [36.65.020 - School districts to be retained as separate political subdivisions.](#3665020---school-districts-to-be-retained-as-separate-political-subdivisions)
* [36.65.030 - Tax on net income prohibited.](#3665030---tax-on-net-income-prohibited)
* [36.65.040 - Method of allocating state revenues.](#3665040---method-of-allocating-state-revenues)
* [36.65.050 - Fire protection or law enforcement units—Binding arbitration in collective bargaining.](#3665050---fire-protection-or-law-enforcement-unitsbinding-arbitration-in-collective-bargaining)
* [36.65.060 - Public employee retirement or disability benefits not affected.](#3665060---public-employee-retirement-or-disability-benefits-not-affected)
## 36.65.010 - Intent.
It is the intent of the legislature in enacting this chapter to provide for the implementation and clarification of Article XI, section 16 of the state Constitution, which authorizes the formation of combined city and county municipal corporations.

"City-county," as used in this chapter, means a combined city and county municipal corporation under Article XI, section 16 of the state Constitution.

\[ [1984 c 91 § 1](http://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1984c91.pdf?cite=1984%20c%2091%20§%201); \]

## 36.65.020 - School districts to be retained as separate political subdivisions.
Recognizing the paramount duty of the state to provide for the common schools under Article IX, sections 1 and 2 of the state Constitution, school districts shall be retained as separate political subdivisions within the city-county.

\[ [1984 c 91 § 2](http://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1984c91.pdf?cite=1984%20c%2091%20§%202); \]

## 36.65.030 - Tax on net income prohibited.
A county, city, or city-county shall not levy a tax on net income.

\[ [1984 c 91 § 3](http://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1984c91.pdf?cite=1984%20c%2091%20§%203); \]

## 36.65.040 - Method of allocating state revenues.
The method of allocating state revenues shall not be modified for a period of one year from the date the initial officers of the city-county assume office. During the one-year period, state revenue shares shall be calculated as if the preexisting county, cities, and special purpose districts had continued as separate entities. However, distributions of the revenue to the consolidated entities shall be made to the city-county.

\[ [1984 c 91 § 4](http://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1984c91.pdf?cite=1984%20c%2091%20§%204); \]

## 36.65.050 - Fire protection or law enforcement units—Binding arbitration in collective bargaining.
Subject to the requirements of RCW 41.56.100 and 41.58.070, if the city-county government includes a fire protection or law enforcement unit that was, prior to the formation of the city-county, governed by a state statute providing for binding arbitration in collective bargaining, then the entire fire protection or law enforcement unit of the city-county shall be governed by that statute.

\[ [2021 c 13 § 5](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/2021-22/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/Senate/5055-S.SL.pdf?cite=2021%20c%2013%20§%205); [1984 c 91 § 5](http://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1984c91.pdf?cite=1984%20c%2091%20§%205); \]

## 36.65.060 - Public employee retirement or disability benefits not affected.
The formation of a city-county shall not have the effect of reducing, restricting, or limiting retirement or disability benefits of any person employed by or retired from a municipal corporation, or who had a vested right in any state or local retirement system, prior to the formation of the city-county.

\[ [1984 c 91 § 6](http://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1984c91.pdf?cite=1984%20c%2091%20§%206); \]

