# 36.37 - Agricultural fairs and poultry shows.
* [36.37.010 - Fairs authorized—Declared county purpose.](#3637010---fairs-authorizeddeclared-county-purpose)
* [36.37.020 - Property may be acquired for fairs.](#3637020---property-may-be-acquired-for-fairs)
* [36.37.040 - Expenditure of funds—Revolving fund—Management of fairs.](#3637040---expenditure-of-fundsrevolving-fundmanagement-of-fairs)
* [36.37.050 - District or multiple county fairs authorized.](#3637050---district-or-multiple-county-fairs-authorized)
* [36.37.090 - Poultry shows—Petition—Appropriation.](#3637090---poultry-showspetitionappropriation)
* [36.37.100 - Poultry shows—Open to public—Admission charge.](#3637100---poultry-showsopen-to-publicadmission-charge)
* [36.37.110 - Poultry shows—Conduct of shows.](#3637110---poultry-showsconduct-of-shows)
* [36.37.150 - Lease of state-owned lands for county fairgrounds.](#3637150---lease-of-state-owned-lands-for-county-fairgrounds)
* [36.37.160 - Lease of state-owned lands for county fairgrounds—Lands adjacent to Northern State Hospital.](#3637160---lease-of-state-owned-lands-for-county-fairgroundslands-adjacent-to-northern-state-hospital)
## 36.37.010 - Fairs authorized—Declared county purpose.
The holding of county fairs and agricultural exhibitions of stock, cereals, and agricultural produce of all kinds, including dairy produce, as well as arts and manufactures, by any county in the state, and the participation by any county in a district fair or agricultural exhibition, is declared to be in the interest of public good and a strictly county purpose.

\[ [1963 c 4 § 36.37.010](https://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1963c4.pdf?cite=1963%20c%204%20§%2036.37.010); [1947 c 184 § 1](https://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1947c184.pdf?cite=1947%20c%20184%20§%201); [1917 c 32 § 1](https://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1917c32.pdf?cite=1917%20c%2032%20§%201); Rem. Supp. 1947 § 2750; \]

## 36.37.020 - Property may be acquired for fairs.
The board of county commissioners of any county in the state may acquire by gift, devise, purchase, condemnation and purchase, or otherwise, lands, property rights, leases, easements, and all kinds of personal property and own and hold the same and construct and maintain temporary or permanent improvements suitable and necessary for the purpose of holding and maintaining county or district fairs for the exhibition of county or district resources and products.

\[ [1963 c 4 § 36.37.020](https://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1963c4.pdf?cite=1963%20c%204%20§%2036.37.020); [1947 c 184 § 2](https://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1947c184.pdf?cite=1947%20c%20184%20§%202); [1917 c 32 § 2](https://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1917c32.pdf?cite=1917%20c%2032%20§%202); Rem. Supp. 1947 § 2751; \]

## 36.37.040 - Expenditure of funds—Revolving fund—Management of fairs.
The board of county commissioners of any county may appropriate and expend each year such sums of money as they deem advisable and necessary for (1) acquisition of necessary grounds for fairs and world fairs, (2) construction, improvement and maintenance of buildings thereon, (3) payment of fair premiums, and (4) the general maintenance of such fair. The board of county commissioners of any county may also authorize the county auditor to provide a revolving fund to be used by the fair officials for the conduct of the fair. The board of county commissioners may employ persons to assist in the management of fairs or by resolution designate a nonprofit corporation as the exclusive agency to operate and manage such fairs.

\[ [1963 c 4 § 36.37.040](https://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1963c4.pdf?cite=1963%20c%204%20§%2036.37.040); [1957 c 124 § 1](https://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1957c124.pdf?cite=1957%20c%20124%20§%201); [1955 c 297 § 1](https://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1955c297.pdf?cite=1955%20c%20297%20§%201); prior:   1947 c 184 § 3; [1943 c 101 § 1](https://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1943c101.pdf?cite=1943%20c%20101%20§%201); [1923 c 83 § 2](https://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1923c83.pdf?cite=1923%20c%2083%20§%202); Rem. Supp. 1947 § 2753 1/2.   1923 c 83 § 1; [1917 c 32 § 4](https://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1917c32.pdf?cite=1917%20c%2032%20§%204); RRS § 2753; \]

## 36.37.050 - District or multiple county fairs authorized.
Each county is authorized to hold one county fair in each year, or, as an alternative, to participate with any other county or counties in the holding of a district fair. Where counties participate in the holding of a district fair, the boards of county commissioners of each of participating counties may enter into mutual agreements setting forth the manner and extent of the participation by each county in the management and support of the district fair, subject to the limitations imposed on each respective county by the provisions of this chapter.

\[ [1963 c 4 § 36.37.050](https://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1963c4.pdf?cite=1963%20c%204%20§%2036.37.050); [1947 c 184 § 4](https://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1947c184.pdf?cite=1947%20c%20184%20§%204); Rem. Supp. 1947 § 2753a; \]

## 36.37.090 - Poultry shows—Petition—Appropriation.
Upon petition of twenty-five resident taxpayers of any county who are interested in the poultry industry, the board of county commissioners may set aside and include in its annual budget a sum equivalent to five percent of the assessed valuation of poultry in the county each year for the purpose of holding winter poultry shows, the said sum not to exceed five hundred dollars in any one year.

\[ [1963 c 4 § 36.37.090](https://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1963c4.pdf?cite=1963%20c%204%20§%2036.37.090); [1929 c 109 § 1](https://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1929c109.pdf?cite=1929%20c%20109%20§%201); RRS § 2755-1; \]

## 36.37.100 - Poultry shows—Open to public—Admission charge.
All poultry shows shall be open to the public. Such admission charge may be made as is authorized by the board of county commissioners.

\[ [1963 c 4 § 36.37.100](https://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1963c4.pdf?cite=1963%20c%204%20§%2036.37.100); [1929 c 109 § 2](https://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1929c109.pdf?cite=1929%20c%20109%20§%202); RRS § 2755-2; \]

## 36.37.110 - Poultry shows—Conduct of shows.
All such poultry shows shall be held under the rules of the American Poultry Association and only licensed poultry judges shall be employed thereat.

\[ [1963 c 4 § 36.37.110](https://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1963c4.pdf?cite=1963%20c%204%20§%2036.37.110); [1929 c 109 § 3](https://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1929c109.pdf?cite=1929%20c%20109%20§%203); RRS § 2755-3; \]

## 36.37.150 - Lease of state-owned lands for county fairgrounds.
If requested by a county legislative authority, an agency of the state managing state-owned lands, other than state trust lands, shall consider leasing a requested portion of these lands that are not used for any significant purpose and if not otherwise prohibited, to the county to be used as county fairgrounds. If it is determined that such a lease shall be made, the agency in setting lease charges shall consider the fair market return for leasing the land, the public benefit for leasing the land to the county for county fair purposes at a level below the fair market return, and other appropriate factors.

\[ [1986 c 307 § 3](https://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1986c307.pdf?cite=1986%20c%20307%20§%203); \]

## 36.37.160 - Lease of state-owned lands for county fairgrounds—Lands adjacent to Northern State Hospital.
If requested by a county legislative authority, the department of natural resources shall negotiate a lease for any requested portion of the state lands directly adjacent to buildings on the Northern State Hospital site that were transferred to the department under chapter 178, Laws of 1974 ex. sess., if not otherwise prohibited, to the county to use for the purpose of establishing county fairgrounds. However, the portion to be leased shall be contiguous and compact, of an area not to exceed two hundred fifty acres and shall be segregated in such a manner that the remaining portion of these state lands can be efficiently managed by the department. The lease shall be for as long as the county is actually using the land as the site of the county fairgrounds. Notwithstanding chapter 178, Laws of 1974 ex. sess., the department shall charge the county the sum of one thousand dollars per year for the lease of such lands and this sum may be periodically adjusted to compensate the department for any increased costs in administration of the lease. The lease shall contain provisions directing payment of all assessments and authorizing the county to place any improvements on the leased lands if the improvements are consistent with the purposes of county fairs.

\[ [1986 c 307 § 2](https://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1986c307.pdf?cite=1986%20c%20307%20§%202); \]

