# 36.39 - Assistance and relief.
* [36.39.010 - Public assistance.](#3639010---public-assistance)
* [36.39.030 - Disposal of remains of indigent persons.](#3639030---disposal-of-remains-of-indigent-persons)
* [36.39.040 - Federal surplus commodities—County expenses—Handling commodities for certified persons—County program, cooperative program.](#3639040---federal-surplus-commoditiescounty-expenseshandling-commodities-for-certified-personscounty-program-cooperative-program)
* [36.39.050 - Federal surplus commodities—Certification of persons by department of social and health services.](#3639050---federal-surplus-commoditiescertification-of-persons-by-department-of-social-and-health-services)
* [36.39.060 - Senior citizens programs—Long-term care ombuds programs—Authorization.](#3639060---senior-citizens-programslong-term-care-ombuds-programsauthorization)
## 36.39.010 - Public assistance.
Public assistance generally, see Title 74 RCW.

\[ \]

## 36.39.030 - Disposal of remains of indigent persons.
The board of county commissioners of any county shall provide for the disposition of the remains of any indigent person including a recipient of public assistance who dies within the county and whose body is unclaimed by relatives or church organization.

\[ [1963 c 4 § 36.39.030](https://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1963c4.pdf?cite=1963%20c%204%20§%2036.39.030); [1953 c 224 § 1](https://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1953c224.pdf?cite=1953%20c%20224%20§%201); [1951 c 258 § 1](https://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1951c258.pdf?cite=1951%20c%20258%20§%201); \]

## 36.39.040 - Federal surplus commodities—County expenses—Handling commodities for certified persons—County program, cooperative program.
The county commissioners of any county may expend from the county general fund for the purpose of receiving, warehousing and distributing federal surplus commodities for the use of or assistance to recipients of public assistance or other needy families and individuals when such recipients, families or individuals are certified as eligible to obtain such commodities by the state department of social and health services. The county commissioners may expend county general fund moneys to carry out any such program as a sole county operation or in conjunction or cooperation with any similar program of distribution by private individuals or organizations, any department of the state, or any political subdivision of the state.

\[ [1979 c 141 § 43](https://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1979c141.pdf?cite=1979%20c%20141%20§%2043); [1963 c 4 § 36.39.040](https://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1963c4.pdf?cite=1963%20c%204%20§%2036.39.040); [1957 c 187 § 5](https://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1957c187.pdf?cite=1957%20c%20187%20§%205); \]

## 36.39.050 - Federal surplus commodities—Certification of persons by department of social and health services.
See RCW 74.04.340 through 74.04.360.

\[ \]

## 36.39.060 - Senior citizens programs—Long-term care ombuds programs—Authorization.
1. Counties, cities, and towns are granted the authority, and it is hereby declared to be a public purpose for counties, cities, and towns, to establish and administer senior citizens programs either directly or by creating public corporations or authorities to carry out the programs and to expend their own funds for such purposes, as well as to expend federal, state, or private funds that are made available for such purposes. Such federal funds shall include, but not be limited to, funds provided under the federal older Americans act, as amended (42 U.S.C. Sec. 3001 et seq.).

2. Counties, cities, and towns may establish and administer long-term care ombuds programs for residents, patients, and clients if such a program is not prohibited by federal or state law. Such local ombuds programs shall be coordinated with the efforts of other long-term care ombuds programs, including the office of the state long-term care ombuds established in RCW 43.190.030, to avoid multiple investigation of complaints.

\[ [2013 c 23 § 67](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/2013-14/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/Senate/5077-S.SL.pdf?cite=2013%20c%2023%20§%2067); [1983 c 290 § 13](https://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1983c290.pdf?cite=1983%20c%20290%20§%2013); [1979 c 109 § 1](https://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1979c109.pdf?cite=1979%20c%20109%20§%201); \]

