# 36.92 - County central services department.
* [36.92.010 - Purpose.](#3692010---purpose)
* [36.92.020 - Definitions.](#3692020---definitions)
* [36.92.030 - County central services department—Created—Supervisor.](#3692030---county-central-services-departmentcreatedsupervisor)
* [36.92.040 - Central services fund.](#3692040---central-services-fund)
* [36.92.050 - Comprehensive data processing use plan—Utilization of equipment.](#3692050---comprehensive-data-processing-use-planutilization-of-equipment)
* [36.92.060 - Appointment of assistants.](#3692060---appointment-of-assistants)
* [36.92.070 - Charges for services—Duties of county treasurer.](#3692070---charges-for-servicesduties-of-county-treasurer)
* [36.92.080 - Services limited to department.](#3692080---services-limited-to-department)
## 36.92.010 - Purpose.
The purpose of this chapter is to provide county officials of each county with a modern approach to the common problems encountered by said officers in accounting, recordkeeping, and problem solving, thereby effectuating economies in county government.

It is further the intent of this chapter that the constitutional autonomy of the various county officers be preserved while providing such officials with a centralized department to perform ministerial functions for them on the most modern and efficient machines available.

\[ [1967 ex.s. c 103 § 2](http://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1967ex1c103.pdf?cite=1967%20ex.s.%20c%20103%20§%202); \]

## 36.92.020 - Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following words shall have the meanings ascribed herein:

1. "Services department" shall mean the county central services department, established in accordance with the provisions of this chapter.

2. "Board" shall mean the board of county commissioners.

3. "Automatic data processing" or "ADP" shall mean that method of processing information using mechanical or electronic machines, guided by predetermined instructions to produce information in usable form, and shall include but not be limited to electronic accounting machines, electronic data processing machines, and computers.

4. "Electronic accounting machines" or "EAM" shall mean that method of ADP utilizing punch cards or unit record equipment.

5. "Electronic data processing" or "EDP" shall include that system which comprises a combination of equipment or unites to provide input of source data, storage and processing of data and output in predetermined form, including a central processing unit (CPU) or main frame.

6. "Computer" shall mean any device that is capable of solving problems and supplying results by accepting data and performing prescribed operations. It shall include analog or digital, general purpose or special purpose computers.

7. "Copy" or "micro-copy" shall mean photographic, photostatic, photomechanical or other copy process.

It is the intent of this chapter that the definitions contained in subsections (3) through (7) of this section shall be construed in the broadest possible interpretation in order that new and modern equipment and methods as they become available shall be included therein.

\[ [1967 ex.s. c 103 § 3](http://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1967ex1c103.pdf?cite=1967%20ex.s.%20c%20103%20§%203); \]

## 36.92.030 - County central services department—Created—Supervisor.
By resolution, the board of county commissioners may create a county central services department which shall be organized and function as any other department of the county. When a board creates a central services department, it shall also provide for the appointment of a supervisor to be the administrative head of such department, subject to the supervision and control of the board, and to serve at the pleasure of the board. The supervisor shall receive such salary as may be prescribed by the board. In addition, the supervisor shall be reimbursed for traveling and other actual and necessary expenses incurred by him or her in the performance of his or her official duties.

\[ [2009 c 549 § 4150](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/2009-10/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/Senate/5038.SL.pdf?cite=2009%20c%20549%20§%204150); [1967 ex.s. c 103 § 4](http://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1967ex1c103.pdf?cite=1967%20ex.s.%20c%20103%20§%204); \]

## 36.92.040 - Central services fund.
When a central services department is created, the board shall establish a central services fund for the payment of all costs of conducting those services for which such department was organized and annually budget therefor. It may make transfers into the central services fund from the current expense fund and receive funds for such purposes from other departments and recipients of such services.

\[ [1967 ex.s. c 103 § 5](http://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1967ex1c103.pdf?cite=1967%20ex.s.%20c%20103%20§%205); \]

## 36.92.050 - Comprehensive data processing use plan—Utilization of equipment.
Services departments created pursuant to this chapter shall initially draw a comprehensive data processing use plan. It shall establish levels of service to be performed by the department and shall establish levels of service required by using agencies. Before proceeding with purchase, lease or acquisition of the data processing equipment, the comprehensive data processing use plan shall be adopted by the board.

When established by the board, the services department may perform the service functions relating to accounting, recordkeeping, and micro-copy by the utilization of automatic data processing and micro-copy equipment.

In relation to said equipment the services department shall perform any ministerial services authorized by the board and requested by the various officers and departments of the county. In this connection, it is the intent of this chapter that the services department be authorized to utilize such equipment to the highest degree consistent with the purposes of this chapter and not inconsistent with constitutional powers and duties of such officers.

The services department is also authorized to utilize such equipment for the purpose of problem solving when such problem solving is of a ministerial rather than a discretionary nature.

\[ [1967 ex.s. c 103 § 6](http://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1967ex1c103.pdf?cite=1967%20ex.s.%20c%20103%20§%206); \]

## 36.92.060 - Appointment of assistants.
The supervisor shall have the authority to appoint, subject to the approval of the board, such clerical and other assistants as may be required and authorized for the proper discharge of the functions of the services department.

\[ [1967 ex.s. c 103 § 7](http://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1967ex1c103.pdf?cite=1967%20ex.s.%20c%20103%20§%207); \]

## 36.92.070 - Charges for services—Duties of county treasurer.
The board of county commissioners shall fix the terms and charges for services rendered by the central services department pursuant to this chapter, which amounts shall be credited as income to the appropriate account within the central services fund and charged on a monthly basis against the account of the recipient for whom such services were performed. Moneys derived from the activities of the central services department shall be disbursed from the central services fund by the county treasurer by warrants on vouchers duly authorized by the board.

\[ [1967 ex.s. c 103 § 8](http://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1967ex1c103.pdf?cite=1967%20ex.s.%20c%20103%20§%208); \]

## 36.92.080 - Services limited to department.
When a board of county commissioners creates a central services department pursuant to RCW 36.92.030, the ministerial services to be performed by such department in connection with automatic data processing shall not thereafter be performed by any other officer or employee of said county.

\[ [1967 ex.s. c 103 § 9](http://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1967ex1c103.pdf?cite=1967%20ex.s.%20c%20103%20§%209); \]

