# 49.64 - Employee benefit plans.
* [49.64.010 - Duration of trusts for employee benefits.](#4964010---duration-of-trusts-for-employee-benefits)
* [49.64.020 - Trusts exempted from limitation as to duration.](#4964020---trusts-exempted-from-limitation-as-to-duration)
* [49.64.030 - Employee benefit plans—Payment or refund as discharge—Adverse claims.](#4964030---employee-benefit-planspayment-or-refund-as-dischargeadverse-claims)
* [49.64.040 - Dental care assistance plans—Options required.](#4964040---dental-care-assistance-plansoptions-required)
## 49.64.010 - Duration of trusts for employee benefits.
Any trust heretofore or hereafter created for the purposes and of the type enumerated in RCW 49.64.020, whether in real or personal property or in real and personal property, may continue for such time as may be necessary to accomplish the purposes of the trust and shall not be invalid as violating any statute or rule of law against perpetuities, or against accumulations of earnings, or concerning the suspension of the power of alienation of the title to property, or otherwise limiting the duration of trusts.

\[ [1955 c 158 § 1](https://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1955c158.pdf?cite=1955%20c%20158%20§%201); \]

## 49.64.020 - Trusts exempted from limitation as to duration.
Trusts which are entitled to the exemption from limitation as to their duration provided for in RCW 49.64.010 must be:

1. Created by an employer primarily for the benefit of some or all of the employees of such employer or the families or appointees of such employees, under any pension, profit-sharing, stock bonus, retirement, disability, death benefit or other similar types of employee-benefit plans; and

2. Contributed to by the employer or employees or both; and

3. Existing for the purpose of distributing to or for the benefit of some or all of such employees (either before or after their employment ceases), their families or appointees, the earnings or principal, or earnings and principal, of the trust.

\[ [1955 c 158 § 2](https://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1955c158.pdf?cite=1955%20c%20158%20§%202); \]

## 49.64.030 - Employee benefit plans—Payment or refund as discharge—Adverse claims.
Notwithstanding the provisions of RCW 26.16.030, whenever payment or refund is made to an employee, former employee, or his or her beneficiary or estate pursuant to and in full compliance with a written retirement, death, or other employee benefit plan or savings plan, such payment or refund shall fully discharge the employer and any trustee or insurance company making such payment or refund from all adverse claims thereto unless, before such payment or refund is made, the employer or former employer, where the payment is made by the employer or former employer, has received at its principal place of business within this state, written notice by or on behalf of some other person that such other person claims to be entitled to such payment or refund or some part thereof, or where a trustee or insurance company is making the payment, such notice has been received by the trustee or insurance company at its home office or its principal place of business within this state, and if none, such notice may be made on the secretary of state: PROVIDED, HOWEVER, That nothing contained in this section shall affect any claim or right to any such payment or refund or part thereof as between all persons other than employer and the trustee or insurance company making such payment or refund.

\[ [2010 c 8 § 12061](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/2009-10/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/Senate/6239-S.SL.pdf?cite=2010%20c%208%20§%2012061); [1953 c 45 § 1](https://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1953c45.pdf?cite=1953%20c%2045%20§%201); \]

## 49.64.040 - Dental care assistance plans—Options required.
1. Unless the context clearly requires otherwise, in this section "dental care assistance plan" means any plan of dental insurance offered by an insurer as defined by chapter 48.01 RCW and any agreement for dental care benefits entered into or renewed after January 1, 1989, provided by a health care service contractor as defined by chapter 48.44 RCW.

2. Each employer, public or private, that offers its employees a dental care assistance plan and each employee benefits fund that offers its members a dental care assistance plan limiting the provider of dental care to designated providers or group of providers, shall make available to and inform its employees or members of the option of enrolling in an alternative dental care assistance plan that permits the employees or members to obtain dental care services from any licensed dental care provider of their choice. The portion of the premium paid by the employer for the limiting plan shall be comparable to, but in no case greater than, the portion of the premium paid by the employer for the other plan. If employees are members of a bona fide bargaining unit covered by a labor-management collective bargaining agreement, the selection of the options required by this section may be specified in the agreement. The provisions of this section are not mandatory if the employees are covered by Taft-Hartley health care trust, except that the labor-management trustees may contract with a dental care assistance plan if a feasibility study determines it is to the advantage of the members: PROVIDED, That this section shall only apply to employers with greater than twenty-five employees under coverage.

\[ [1988 c 259 § 1](https://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1988c259.pdf?cite=1988%20c%20259%20§%201); \]

