# 70A.220 - Labeling of plastics.
* [70A.220.010 - Definitions.](#70a220010---definitions)
* [70A.220.020 - Plastic bottle or rigid plastic container—Labeling requirements.](#70a220020---plastic-bottle-or-rigid-plastic-containerlabeling-requirements)
* [70A.220.030 - Violations, penalty.](#70a220030---violations-penalty)
## 70A.220.010 - Definitions.
Unless the context clearly requires otherwise, the definitions in this section apply throughout this chapter.

1. "Container," unless otherwise specified, refers to "rigid plastic container" or "plastic bottle" as those terms are defined in this section.

2. "Distributors" means those persons engaged in the distribution of packaged goods for sale in the state of Washington, including manufacturers, wholesalers, and retailers.

3. "Label" means a molded, imprinted, or raised symbol on or near the bottom of a plastic container or bottle.

4. "Person" means an individual, sole proprietor, partnership, association, or other legal entity.

5. "Plastic" means a material made of polymeric organic compounds and additives that can be shaped by flow.

6. "Plastic bottle" means a plastic container intended for single use that has a neck that is smaller than the body of the container, accepts a screw-type, snap cap, or other closure and has a capacity of sixteen fluid ounces or more, but less than five gallons.

7. "Rigid plastic container" means a formed or molded container, other than a bottle, intended for single use, composed predominantly of plastic resin, and having a relatively inflexible finite shape or form with a capacity of eight ounces or more but less than five gallons.

\[ [1991 c 319 § 103](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/1991-92/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/Senate/5591-S2.SL.pdf?cite=1991%20c%20319%20§%20103); \]

## 70A.220.020 - Plastic bottle or rigid plastic container—Labeling requirements.
Except as provided in RCW 70A.220.030(2), after January 1, 1992, no person may distribute, sell, or offer for sale in this state a plastic bottle or rigid plastic container unless the container is labeled with a code identifying the appropriate resin type used to produce the structure of the container. The numbers and letters used shall be as follows:

    a. [(1)] 1.= PETE (polyethylene terephthalate)

    b. [(2)] 2.= HDPE (high density polyethylene)

    c. [(3)] 3.= V (vinyl) or PVC (polyvinyl chloride)

    d. [(4)] 4.= LDPE (low density polyethylene)

    e. [(5)] 5.= PP (polypropylene)

    f. [(6)] 6.= PS (polystyrene)

    g. [(7)] 7.= OTHER

\[ [2021 c 313 § 18](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/2021-22/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/Senate/5022-S2.SL.pdf?cite=2021%20c%20313%20§%2018); [2020 c 20 § 1228](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/2019-20/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/House/2246-S.SL.pdf?cite=2020%20c%2020%20§%201228); [1991 c 319 § 104](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/1991-92/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/Senate/5591-S2.SL.pdf?cite=1991%20c%20319%20§%20104); \]

## 70A.220.030 - Violations, penalty.
1. A person who, after written notice from the department, violates RCW 70A.220.020 is subject to a civil penalty of fifty dollars for each violation up to a maximum of five hundred dollars and may be enjoined from continuing violations. Each distribution constitutes a separate offense.

2. Retailers and distributors shall have two years from May 21, 1991, to clear current inventory, delivered or received and held in their possession as of May 21, 1991.

\[ [2020 c 20 § 1229](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/2019-20/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/House/2246-S.SL.pdf?cite=2020%20c%2020%20§%201229); [1991 c 319 § 105](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/1991-92/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/Senate/5591-S2.SL.pdf?cite=1991%20c%20319%20§%20105); \]

