# 70A.300 - Hazardous waste management.
* [70A.300.005 - Legislative declaration.](#70a300005---legislative-declaration)
* [70A.300.007 - Purpose.](#70a300007---purpose)
* [70A.300.010 - Definitions.](#70a300010---definitions)
* [70A.300.020 - Standards and regulations—Adoption—Notice and hearing—Consultation with other agencies.](#70a300020---standards-and-regulationsadoptionnotice-and-hearingconsultation-with-other-agencies)
* [70A.300.030 - Environmental excellence program agreements—Effect on chapter.](#70a300030---environmental-excellence-program-agreementseffect-on-chapter)
* [70A.300.040 - List and information to be furnished by depositor of hazardous waste—Rules and regulations.](#70a300040---list-and-information-to-be-furnished-by-depositor-of-hazardous-wasterules-and-regulations)
* [70A.300.050 - Solid wastes—Conditionally exempt from chapter.](#70a300050---solid-wastesconditionally-exempt-from-chapter)
* [70A.300.060 - Disposal site or facility—Acquisition—Disposal fee schedule.](#70a300060---disposal-site-or-facilityacquisitiondisposal-fee-schedule)
* [70A.300.070 - Disposal at other than approved site prohibited—Disposal of radioactive wastes.](#70a300070---disposal-at-other-than-approved-site-prohibiteddisposal-of-radioactive-wastes)
* [70A.300.080 - Criteria for receiving waste at disposal site.](#70a300080---criteria-for-receiving-waste-at-disposal-site)
* [70A.300.090 - Violations—Civil penalties.](#70a300090---violationscivil-penalties)
* [70A.300.100 - Violations—Criminal penalties.](#70a300100---violationscriminal-penalties)
* [70A.300.110 - Violations—Gross misdemeanor.](#70a300110---violationsgross-misdemeanor)
* [70A.300.120 - Violations—Orders—Penalty for noncompliance—Appeal.](#70a300120---violationsorderspenalty-for-noncomplianceappeal)
* [70A.300.130 - Action for damages resulting from violation—Attorneys' fees.](#70a300130---action-for-damages-resulting-from-violationattorneys-fees)
* [70A.300.140 - Powers and duties of department.](#70a300140---powers-and-duties-of-department)
* [70A.300.150 - Duty of department to regulate PCB waste.](#70a300150---duty-of-department-to-regulate-pcb-waste)
* [70A.300.160 - Regulation of wastes with radioactive and hazardous components.](#70a300160---regulation-of-wastes-with-radioactive-and-hazardous-components)
* [70A.300.170 - Regulation of dangerous wastes associated with energy facilities.](#70a300170---regulation-of-dangerous-wastes-associated-with-energy-facilities)
* [70A.300.180 - Radioactive wastes—Authority of department of social and health services.](#70a300180---radioactive-wastesauthority-of-department-of-social-and-health-services)
* [70A.300.190 - Application of chapter to special incinerator ash.](#70a300190---application-of-chapter-to-special-incinerator-ash)
* [70A.300.200 - Hazardous substance remedial actions—Procedural requirements not applicable.](#70a300200---hazardous-substance-remedial-actionsprocedural-requirements-not-applicable)
* [70A.300.210 - Authority of attorney general.](#70a300210---authority-of-attorney-general)
* [70A.300.220 - Department's powers as designated agency under federal act.](#70a300220---departments-powers-as-designated-agency-under-federal-act)
* [70A.300.230 - Copies of notification forms or annual reports to officials responsible for fire protection.](#70a300230---copies-of-notification-forms-or-annual-reports-to-officials-responsible-for-fire-protection)
* [70A.300.240 - Rules implemented under RCW  70A.300.220—Review.](#70a300240---rules-implemented-under-rcw--70a300220review)
* [70A.300.250 - Department's authority to participate in and administer federal act.](#70a300250---departments-authority-to-participate-in-and-administer-federal-act)
* [70A.300.260 - Declaration—Management of hazardous waste—Priorities—Definitions.](#70a300260---declarationmanagement-of-hazardous-wasteprioritiesdefinitions)
* [70A.300.270 - Waste management study—Public hearings—Adoption or modification of rules.](#70a300270---waste-management-studypublic-hearingsadoption-or-modification-of-rules)
* [70A.300.280 - Disposal of dangerous wastes at commercial off-site land disposal facilities—Limitations.](#70a300280---disposal-of-dangerous-wastes-at-commercial-off-site-land-disposal-facilitieslimitations)
* [70A.300.290 - Waste management—Consultative services—Technical assistance—Confidentiality.](#70a300290---waste-managementconsultative-servicestechnical-assistanceconfidentiality)
* [70A.300.300 - Disposition of fines and penalties—Earnings.](#70a300300---disposition-of-fines-and-penaltiesearnings)
* [70A.300.310 - Hazardous waste management plan.](#70a300310---hazardous-waste-management-plan)
* [70A.300.320 - Hazardous waste management facilities—Department to develop criteria for siting.](#70a300320---hazardous-waste-management-facilitiesdepartment-to-develop-criteria-for-siting)
* [70A.300.330 - Department to adopt rules for permits for hazardous substances treatment facilities.](#70a300330---department-to-adopt-rules-for-permits-for-hazardous-substances-treatment-facilities)
* [70A.300.340 - Local government regulatory authority to prohibit or condition.](#70a300340---local-government-regulatory-authority-to-prohibit-or-condition)
* [70A.300.350 - Local governments to prepare local hazardous waste plans—Basis—Elements required.](#70a300350---local-governments-to-prepare-local-hazardous-waste-plansbasiselements-required)
* [70A.300.360 - Local governments to prepare local hazardous waste plans—Used oil recycling element.](#70a300360---local-governments-to-prepare-local-hazardous-waste-plansused-oil-recycling-element)
* [70A.300.370 - Local governments to designate zones—Departmental guidelines—Approval of local government zone designations or amendments—Exemption.](#70a300370---local-governments-to-designate-zonesdepartmental-guidelinesapproval-of-local-government-zone-designations-or-amendmentsexemption)
* [70A.300.380 - Local governments to submit letter of intent to identify or designate zones and submit management plans—Department to prepare plan in event of failure to act.](#70a300380---local-governments-to-submit-letter-of-intent-to-identify-or-designate-zones-and-submit-management-plansdepartment-to-prepare-plan-in-event-of-failure-to-act)
* [70A.300.390 - Grants to local governments for plan preparation, implementation, and designation of zones—Matching funds—Qualifications.](#70a300390---grants-to-local-governments-for-plan-preparation-implementation-and-designation-of-zonesmatching-fundsqualifications)
* [70A.300.400 - State preemption—Department sole authority—Local requirements superseded—State authority over designated zone facilities.](#70a300400---state-preemptiondepartment-sole-authoritylocal-requirements-supersededstate-authority-over-designated-zone-facilities)
* [70A.300.410 - Department may require notice of intent for management facility permit.](#70a300410---department-may-require-notice-of-intent-for-management-facility-permit)
* [70A.300.420 - Appeals to pollution control hearings board.](#70a300420---appeals-to-pollution-control-hearings-board)
* [70A.300.430 - Department to provide technical assistance with local plans.](#70a300430---department-to-provide-technical-assistance-with-local-plans)
* [70A.300.440 - Department to assist conflict resolution activities related to siting facilities—Agreements may constitute conditions for permit.](#70a300440---department-to-assist-conflict-resolution-activities-related-to-siting-facilitiesagreements-may-constitute-conditions-for-permit)
* [70A.300.450 - Requirements of RCW  70A.300.310 through  70A.300.380 and  70A.300.400(4) not mandatory without legislative appropriation.](#70a300450---requirements-of-rcw--70a300310-through--70a300380-and--70a3004004-not-mandatory-without-legislative-appropriation)
* [70A.300.460 - Service charges.](#70a300460---service-charges)
* [70A.300.470 - Metals mining and milling operations permits—Inspections by department of ecology.](#70a300470---metals-mining-and-milling-operations-permitsinspections-by-department-of-ecology)
* [70A.300.480 - Radioactive mixed waste account.](#70a300480---radioactive-mixed-waste-account)
* [70A.300.900 - Short title—1985 c 448.](#70a300900---short-title1985-c-448)
## 70A.300.005 - Legislative declaration.
The legislature hereby finds and declares:

1. The health and welfare of the people of the state depend on clean and pure environmental resources unaffected by hazardous waste contamination. At the same time, the quality of life of the people of the state is in part based upon a large variety of goods produced by the economy of the state. The complex industrial processes that produce these goods also generate waste by-products, some of which are hazardous to the public health and the environment if improperly managed.

2. Safe and responsible management of hazardous waste is necessary to prevent adverse effects on the environment and to protect public health and safety.

3. The availability of safe, effective, economical, and environmentally sound facilities for the management of hazardous waste is essential to protect public health and the environment and to preserve the economic strength of the state.

4. Strong and effective enforcement of federal and state hazardous waste laws and regulations is essential to protect the public health and the environment and to meet the public's concerns regarding the acceptance of needed new hazardous waste management facilities.

5. Negotiation, mediation, and similar conflict resolution techniques are useful in resolving concerns over the local impacts of siting hazardous waste management facilities.

6. Safe and responsible management of hazardous waste requires an effective planning process that involves local and state governments, the public, and industry.

7. Public acceptance and successful siting of needed new hazardous waste management facilities depends on several factors, including:

    a.  Public confidence in the safety of the facilities;

    b.  Assurance that the hazardous waste management priorities established in this chapter are being carried out to the maximum degree practical;

    c.  Recognition that all state citizens benefit from certain products whose manufacture results in the generation of hazardous by-products, and that all state citizens must, therefore, share in the responsibility for finding safe and effective means to manage this hazardous waste; and

    d.  Provision of adequate opportunities for citizens to meet with facility operators and resolve concerns about local hazardous waste management facilities.

8. Due to the controversial and regional nature of facilities for the disposal and incineration of hazardous waste, the facilities have had difficulty in obtaining necessary local approvals. The legislature finds that there is a statewide interest in assuring that such facilities can be sited.

It is therefore the intent of the legislature to preempt local government's authority to approve, deny, or otherwise regulate disposal and incineration facilities, and to vest in the department of ecology the sole authority among state, regional, and local agencies to approve, deny, and regulate preempted facilities, as defined in this chapter.

In addition, it is the intent of the legislature that such complete preemptive authority also be vested in the department for treatment and storage facilities, in addition to disposal and incineration facilities, if a local government fails to carry out its responsibilities established in RCW 70A.300.370.

It is further the intent of the legislature that no local ordinance, permit requirement, other requirement, or decision shall prohibit on the basis of land use considerations the construction of a hazardous waste management facility within any zone designated and approved in accordance with this chapter, provided that the proposed site for the facility is consistent with applicable state siting criteria.

9. With the exception of the disposal site authorized for acquisition under this chapter, the private sector has had the primary role in providing hazardous waste management facilities and services in the state. It is the intent of the legislature that this role be encouraged and continue into the future to the extent feasible. Whether privately or publicly owned and operated, hazardous waste management facilities and services should be subject to strict governmental regulation as provided under this chapter.

10. Wastes that are exempt or excluded from full regulation under this chapter due to their small quantity or household origin have the potential to pose significant risk to public health and the environment if not properly managed. It is the intent of the legislature that the specific risks posed by such waste be investigated and assessed and that programs be carried out as necessary to manage the waste appropriately. In addition, the legislature finds that, because local conditions vary substantially in regard to the quantities, risks, and management opportunities available for such wastes, local government is the appropriate level of government to plan for and carry out programs to manage moderate-risk waste, with assistance and coordination provided by the department.

\[ [2020 c 20 § 1277](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/2019-20/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/House/2246-S.SL.pdf?cite=2020%20c%2020%20§%201277); [1985 c 448 § 2](http://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1985c448.pdf?cite=1985%20c%20448%20§%202); \]

## 70A.300.007 - Purpose.
The purpose of this chapter is to establish a comprehensive statewide framework for the planning, regulation, control, and management of hazardous waste which will prevent land, air, and water pollution and conserve the natural, economic, and energy resources of the state. To this end it is the purpose of this chapter:

1. To provide broad powers of regulation to the department of ecology relating to management of hazardous wastes and releases of hazardous substances;

2. To promote waste reduction and to encourage other improvements in waste management practices;

3. To promote cooperation between state and local governments by assigning responsibilities for planning for hazardous wastes to the state and planning for moderate-risk waste to local government;

4. To provide for prevention of problems related to improper management of hazardous substances before such problems occur; and

5. To assure that needed hazardous waste management facilities may be sited in the state, and to ensure the safe operation of the facilities.

\[ [1985 c 448 § 3](http://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1985c448.pdf?cite=1985%20c%20448%20§%203); \]

## 70A.300.010 - Definitions.
The words and phrases defined in this section shall have the meanings indicated when used in this chapter unless the context clearly requires otherwise.

1. "Dangerous wastes" means any discarded, useless, unwanted, or abandoned substances, including but not limited to certain pesticides, or any residues or containers of such substances which are disposed of in such quantity or concentration as to pose a substantial present or potential hazard to human health, wildlife, or the environment because such wastes or constituents or combinations of such wastes:

    a.  Have short-lived, toxic properties that may cause death, injury, or illness or have mutagenic, teratogenic, or carcinogenic properties; or

    b.  Are corrosive, explosive, flammable, or may generate pressure through decomposition or other means.

2. "Department" means the department of ecology.

3. "Designated zone facility" means any facility that requires an interim or final status permit under rules adopted under this chapter and that is not a preempted facility as defined in this section.

4. "Director" means the director of the department of ecology or the director's designee.

5. "Disposal site" means a geographical site in or upon which hazardous wastes are disposed of in accordance with the provisions of this chapter.

6. "Dispose or disposal" means the discarding or abandoning of hazardous wastes or the treatment, decontamination, or recycling of such wastes once they have been discarded or abandoned.

7. "Extremely hazardous waste" means any dangerous waste which:

    a.  Will persist in a hazardous form for several years or more at a disposal site and which in its persistent form

        i.  Presents a significant environmental hazard and may be concentrated by living organisms through a food chain or may affect the genetic makeup of human beings or wildlife, and

        ii.  Is highly toxic to human beings or wildlife

    b.  If disposed of at a disposal site in such quantities as would present an extreme hazard to human beings or the environment.

8. "Facility" means all contiguous land and structures, other appurtenances, and improvements on the land used for recycling, storing, treating, incinerating, or disposing of hazardous waste.

9. "Hazardous household substances" means those substances identified by the department as hazardous household substances in the guidelines developed under RCW 70A.300.350.

10. "Hazardous substances" means any liquid, solid, gas, or sludge, including any material, substance, product, commodity, or waste, regardless of quantity, that exhibits any of the characteristics or criteria of hazardous waste as described in rules adopted under this chapter.

11. "Hazardous waste" means and includes all dangerous and extremely hazardous waste, including substances composed of both radioactive and hazardous components.

12. "Local government" means a city, town, or county.

13. "Moderate-risk waste" means (a) any waste that exhibits any of the properties of hazardous waste but is exempt from regulation under this chapter solely because the waste is generated in quantities below the threshold for regulation, and (b) any household wastes which are generated from the disposal of substances identified by the department as hazardous household substances.

14. "Person" means any person, firm, association, county, public or municipal or private corporation, agency, or other entity whatsoever.

15. "Pesticide" shall have the meaning of the term as defined in RCW 15.58.030 as now or hereafter amended.

16. "Preempted facility" means any facility that includes as a significant part of its activities any of the following operations: (a) Landfill, (b) incineration, (c) land treatment, (d) surface impoundment to be closed as a landfill, or (e) waste pile to be closed as a landfill.

17. "Service charge" means an assessment imposed under RCW 70A.300.460 against those facilities that store, treat, incinerate, or dispose of dangerous or extremely hazardous waste that contains both a nonradioactive hazardous component and a radioactive component. Service charges shall also apply to facilities undergoing closure under this chapter in those instances where closure entails the physical characterization of remaining wastes which contain both a nonradioactive hazardous component and a radioactive component or the management of such wastes through treatment or removal, except any commercial low-level radioactive waste facility.

\[ [2020 c 20 § 1278](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/2019-20/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/House/2246-S.SL.pdf?cite=2020%20c%2020%20§%201278); [2010 1st sp.s. c 7 § 88](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/2009-10/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/House/2617-S2.SL.pdf?cite=2010%201st%20sp.s.%20c%207%20§%2088); [2009 c 549 § 1027](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/2009-10/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/Senate/5038.SL.pdf?cite=2009%20c%20549%20§%201027); [1989 c 376 § 1](http://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1989c376.pdf?cite=1989%20c%20376%20§%201); [1987 c 488 § 1](http://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1987c488.pdf?cite=1987%20c%20488%20§%201); [1985 c 448 § 1](http://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1985c448.pdf?cite=1985%20c%20448%20§%201); 1975-'76 2nd ex.s. c 101 § 1; \]

## 70A.300.020 - Standards and regulations—Adoption—Notice and hearing—Consultation with other agencies.
The department after notice and public hearing shall:

1. Adopt regulations designating as extremely hazardous wastes subject to the provisions of this chapter those substances which exhibit characteristics consistent with the definition provided in RCW 70A.300.010(7);

2. Adopt and may revise when appropriate, minimum standards and regulations for disposal of extremely hazardous wastes to protect against hazards to the public, and to the environment. Before adoption of such standards and regulations, the department shall consult with appropriate agencies of interested local governments and secure technical assistance from the department of agriculture, the department of social and health services, the department of fish and wildlife, the department of natural resources, the department of labor and industries, and the department of commerce, through the director of fire protection.

\[ [2020 c 20 § 1279](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/2019-20/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/House/2246-S.SL.pdf?cite=2020%20c%2020%20§%201279); [1994 c 264 § 42](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/1993-94/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/House/2590.SL.pdf?cite=1994%20c%20264%20§%2042); [1988 c 36 § 28](http://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1988c36.pdf?cite=1988%20c%2036%20§%2028); [1986 c 266 § 119](http://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1986c266.pdf?cite=1986%20c%20266%20§%20119); 1975-'76 2nd ex.s. c 101 § 2; \]

## 70A.300.030 - Environmental excellence program agreements—Effect on chapter.
Notwithstanding any other provision of law, any legal requirement under this chapter, including any standard, limitation, rule, or order is superseded and replaced in accordance with the terms and provisions of an environmental excellence program agreement, entered into under chapter 43.21K RCW.

\[ [1997 c 381 § 23](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/1997-98/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/House/1866-S2.SL.pdf?cite=1997%20c%20381%20§%2023); \]

## 70A.300.040 - List and information to be furnished by depositor of hazardous waste—Rules and regulations.
1. After the effective date of the regulations adopted by the department designating extremely hazardous wastes, any person planning to dispose of extremely hazardous waste as designated by the department shall provide the operator of the disposal site with a list setting forth the extremely hazardous wastes for disposal, the amount of such wastes, the general chemical and mineral composition of such waste listed by approximate maximum and minimum percentages, and the origin of any such waste. Such list, when appropriate, shall include information on antidotes, first aid, or safety measures to be taken in case of accidental contact with the particular extremely hazardous waste being disposed.

2. The department shall adopt and enforce all rules and regulations including the form and content of the list, necessary and appropriate to accomplish the purposes of subsection (1) of this section.

\[ 1975-'76 2nd ex.s. c 101 § 3; \]

## 70A.300.050 - Solid wastes—Conditionally exempt from chapter.
Solid wastes that designate as dangerous waste or extremely hazardous waste but do not designate as hazardous waste under federal law are conditionally exempt from the requirements of this chapter, if:

1. The waste is generated pursuant to a consent decree issued under chapter 70A.305 RCW;

2. The consent decree characterizes the solid waste and specifies management practices and a department-approved treatment or disposal location;

3. The management practices are consistent with RCW 70A.300.260 and are protective of human health and the environment as determined by the department of ecology; and

4. Waste treated or disposed of on-site will be managed in a manner determined by the department to be as protective of human health and the environment as clean-up standards pursuant to chapter 70A.305 RCW.

This section shall not be interpreted to limit the ability of the department to apply any requirement of this chapter through a consent decree issued under chapter 70A.305 RCW, if the department determines these requirements to be appropriate. Neither shall this section be interpreted to limit the application of this chapter to a cleanup conducted under the federal comprehensive environmental response, compensation, and liability act (42 U.S.C. Sec. 9601 et seq., as amended).

\[ [2020 c 20 § 1280](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/2019-20/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/House/2246-S.SL.pdf?cite=2020%20c%2020%20§%201280); [1994 c 254 § 5](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/1993-94/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/Senate/6123-S.SL.pdf?cite=1994%20c%20254%20§%205); \]

## 70A.300.060 - Disposal site or facility—Acquisition—Disposal fee schedule.
1. The department through the *department of general administration, is authorized to acquire interests in real property from the federal government on the Hanford Reservation by gift, purchase, lease, or other means, to be used for the purpose of developing, operating, and maintaining an extremely hazardous waste disposal site or facility by the department, either directly or by agreement with public or private persons or entities: PROVIDED, That lands acquired under this section shall not be inconsistent with a local comprehensive plan approved prior to January 1, 1976: AND PROVIDED FURTHER, That no lands acquired under this section shall be subject to land use regulation by a local government.

2. The department may establish an appropriate fee schedule for use of such disposal facilities to offset the cost of administration of this chapter and the cost of development, operation, maintenance, and perpetual management of the disposal site. If operated by a private entity, the disposal fee may be such as to provide a reasonable profit.

\[ 1975-'76 2nd ex.s. c 101 § 4; \]

## 70A.300.070 - Disposal at other than approved site prohibited—Disposal of radioactive wastes.
1. No person shall dispose of designated extremely hazardous wastes at any disposal site in the state other than the disposal site established and approved for such purpose under provisions of this chapter, except:

    a.  When such wastes are going to a processing facility which will result in the waste being reclaimed, treated, detoxified, neutralized, or otherwise processed to remove its harmful properties or characteristics; or

    b.  When such wastes are managed on-site as part of a remedial action conducted by the department or by potentially liable persons under a consent decree issued by the department pursuant to chapter 70A.305 RCW.

2. Extremely hazardous wastes that contain radioactive components may be disposed at a radioactive waste disposal site that is (a) owned by the United States department of energy or a licensee of the nuclear regulatory commission and (b) permitted by the department and operated in compliance with the provisions of this chapter. However, prior to disposal, or as a part of disposal, all reasonable methods of treatment, detoxification, neutralization, or other waste management methodologies designed to mitigate hazards associated with these wastes shall be employed, as required by applicable federal and state laws and regulations.

\[ [2020 c 20 § 1281](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/2019-20/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/House/2246-S.SL.pdf?cite=2020%20c%2020%20§%201281); [1994 c 254 § 6](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/1993-94/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/Senate/6123-S.SL.pdf?cite=1994%20c%20254%20§%206); [1987 c 488 § 4](http://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1987c488.pdf?cite=1987%20c%20488%20§%204); 1975-'76 2nd ex.s. c 101 § 5; \]

## 70A.300.080 - Criteria for receiving waste at disposal site.
The department may elect to receive dangerous waste at the site provided under this chapter, provided

1. it is upon request of the owner, producer, or person having custody of the waste, and

2. upon the payment of a fee to cover disposal

3. it can be reasonably demonstrated that there is no other disposal sites in the state that will handle such dangerous waste, and

4. the site is designed to handle such a request or can be modified to the extent necessary to adequately dispose of the waste, or

5. if a demonstrable emergency and potential threat to the public health and safety exists.

\[ 1975-'76 2nd ex.s. c 101 § 7; \]

## 70A.300.090 - Violations—Civil penalties.
1. Except as provided in RCW 43.05.060 through 43.05.080 and 43.05.150, every person who fails to comply with any provision of this chapter or of the rules adopted thereunder shall be subjected to a penalty in an amount of not more than ten thousand dollars per day for every such violation. Each and every such violation shall be a separate and distinct offense. In case of continuing violation, every day's continuance shall be a separate and distinct violation. Every person who, through an act of commission or omission, procures, aids, or abets in the violation shall be considered to have violated the provisions of this section and shall be subject to the penalty herein provided.

2. The penalty provided for in this section shall be imposed pursuant to the procedures in RCW 43.21B.300.

\[ [1995 c 403 § 631](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/1995-96/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/House/1010-S.SL.pdf?cite=1995%20c%20403%20§%20631); [1987 c 109 § 12](http://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1987c109.pdf?cite=1987%20c%20109%20§%2012); [1983 c 172 § 2](http://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1983c172.pdf?cite=1983%20c%20172%20§%202); 1975-'76 2nd ex.s. c 101 § 8; \]

## 70A.300.100 - Violations—Criminal penalties.
1. Any person who knowingly transports, treats, stores, handles, disposes of, or exports a hazardous substance in violation of this chapter is guilty of: (a) A class B felony punishable according to chapter 9A.20 RCW if the person knows at the time that the conduct constituting the violation places another person in imminent danger of death or serious bodily injury; or (b) a class C felony punishable according to chapter 9A.20 RCW if the person knows that the conduct constituting the violation places any property of another person or any natural resources owned by the state of Washington or any of its local governments in imminent danger of harm.

2. As used in this section: (a) "Imminent danger" means that there is a substantial likelihood that harm will be experienced within a reasonable period of time should the danger not be eliminated; and (b) "knowingly" refers to an awareness of facts, not awareness of law.

\[ [2003 c 53 § 357](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/2003-04/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/Senate/5758.SL.pdf?cite=2003%20c%2053%20§%20357); 1989 c 2 § 15 (Initiative Measure No. 97, approved November 8, 1988); \]

## 70A.300.110 - Violations—Gross misdemeanor.
In addition to the penalties imposed pursuant to RCW 70A.300.090, any person who violates any provisions of this chapter, or of the rules implementing this chapter, and any person who knowingly aids or abets another in conducting any violation of any provisions of this chapter, or of the rules implementing this chapter, shall be guilty of a gross misdemeanor and upon conviction thereof shall be punished by a fine of not less than one hundred dollars nor more than ten thousand dollars, and/or by imprisonment in the county jail for up to three hundred sixty-four days, for each separate violation. Each and every such violation shall be a separate and distinct offense. In case of continuing violation, every day's continuance shall be a separate and distinct offense.

\[ [2020 c 20 § 1282](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/2019-20/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/House/2246-S.SL.pdf?cite=2020%20c%2020%20§%201282); [2011 c 96 § 51](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/2011-12/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/Senate/5168-S.SL.pdf?cite=2011%20c%2096%20§%2051); [1984 c 237 § 1](http://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1984c237.pdf?cite=1984%20c%20237%20§%201); [1983 c 172 § 3](http://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1983c172.pdf?cite=1983%20c%20172%20§%203); 1975-'76 2nd ex.s. c 101 § 9; \]

## 70A.300.120 - Violations—Orders—Penalty for noncompliance—Appeal.
1. Whenever on the basis on any information the department determines that a person has violated or is about to violate any provision of this chapter, the department may issue an order requiring compliance either immediately or within a specified period of time. The order shall be delivered by registered mail or personally to the person against whom the order is directed.

2. Any person who fails to take corrective action as specified in a compliance order shall be liable for a civil penalty of not more than ten thousand dollars for each day of continued noncompliance. In addition, the department may suspend or revoke any permits and/or certificates issued under the provisions of this chapter to a person who fails to comply with an order directed against him or her.

3. Any order may be appealed pursuant to RCW 43.21B.310.

\[ [2012 c 117 § 417](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/2011-12/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/Senate/6095.SL.pdf?cite=2012%20c%20117%20§%20417); [1987 c 109 § 16](http://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1987c109.pdf?cite=1987%20c%20109%20§%2016); [1983 c 172 § 4](http://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1983c172.pdf?cite=1983%20c%20172%20§%204); \]

## 70A.300.130 - Action for damages resulting from violation—Attorneys' fees.
A person injured as a result of a violation of this chapter or the rules adopted thereunder may bring an action in superior court for the recovery of the damages. A conviction or imposition of a penalty under this chapter is not a prerequisite to an action under this section.

The court may award reasonable attorneys' fees to a prevailing injured party in an action under this section.

\[ [1983 c 172 § 1](http://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1983c172.pdf?cite=1983%20c%20172%20§%201); \]

## 70A.300.140 - Powers and duties of department.
The department in performing its duties under this chapter may:

1. Conduct studies and coordinate research programs pertaining to extremely hazardous waste management;

2. Render technical assistance to generators of dangerous and extremely hazardous wastes and to state and local agencies in the planning and operation of hazardous waste programs;

3. Encourage and provide technical assistance to waste generators to form and operate a "waste exchange" for the purpose of finding users for dangerous and extremely hazardous wastes that would otherwise be disposed of: PROVIDED, That such technical assistance shall not violate the confidentiality of manufacturing processes; and

4. Provide for appropriate surveillance and monitoring of extremely hazardous waste disposal practices in the state.

\[ 1975-'76 2nd ex.s. c 101 § 10; \]

## 70A.300.150 - Duty of department to regulate PCB waste.
The department of ecology shall regulate under this chapter, wastes generated from the salvaging, rebuilding, or discarding of transformers or capacitors that have been sold or otherwise transferred for salvage or disposal after the completion or termination of their useful lives and which contain polychlorinated biphenyls (PCB's) and whose disposal is not regulated under 40 C.F.R. part 761. Nothing in this section shall prohibit such wastes from being incinerated or disposed of at facilities permitted to manage PCB wastes under 40 C.F.R. part 761.

\[ [2020 c 20 § 1283](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/2019-20/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/House/2246-S.SL.pdf?cite=2020%20c%2020%20§%201283); [1985 c 65 § 1](http://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1985c65.pdf?cite=1985%20c%2065%20§%201); \]

## 70A.300.160 - Regulation of wastes with radioactive and hazardous components.
The department of ecology may regulate all hazardous wastes, including those composed of both radioactive and hazardous components, to the extent it is not preempted by federal law.

\[ [1987 c 488 § 2](http://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1987c488.pdf?cite=1987%20c%20488%20§%202); \]

## 70A.300.170 - Regulation of dangerous wastes associated with energy facilities.
1. Nothing in this chapter shall alter, amend, or supersede the provisions of chapter 80.50 RCW, except that, notwithstanding any provision of chapter 80.50 RCW, regulation of dangerous wastes associated with energy facilities from generation to disposal shall be solely by the department pursuant to this chapter. In the implementation of said section, the department shall consult and cooperate with the energy facility site evaluation council and, in order to reduce duplication of effort and to provide necessary coordination of monitoring and on-site inspection programs at energy facility sites, any on-site inspection by the department that may be required for the purposes of this chapter shall be performed pursuant to an interagency coordination agreement with the council.

2. To facilitate the implementation of this chapter, the energy facility site evaluation council may require certificate holders to remove from their energy facility sites any dangerous wastes, controlled by this chapter, within ninety days of their generation.

\[ [2020 c 20 § 1284](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/2019-20/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/House/2246-S.SL.pdf?cite=2020%20c%2020%20§%201284); [1987 c 488 § 3](http://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1987c488.pdf?cite=1987%20c%20488%20§%203); [1984 c 237 § 3](http://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1984c237.pdf?cite=1984%20c%20237%20§%203); 1975-'76 2nd ex.s. c 101 § 11; \]

## 70A.300.180 - Radioactive wastes—Authority of department of social and health services.
Nothing in this chapter diminishes the authority of the department of social and health services to regulate the radioactive portion of mixed wastes pursuant to chapter 70A.388 RCW.

\[ [2020 c 20 § 1285](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/2019-20/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/House/2246-S.SL.pdf?cite=2020%20c%2020%20§%201285); [1987 c 488 § 5](http://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1987c488.pdf?cite=1987%20c%20488%20§%205); \]

## 70A.300.190 - Application of chapter to special incinerator ash.
This chapter does not apply to special incinerator ash regulated under chapter 70A.315 RCW except that, for purposes of RCW 4.22.070(3)(a), special incinerator ash shall be considered hazardous waste.

\[ [2020 c 20 § 1286](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/2019-20/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/House/2246-S.SL.pdf?cite=2020%20c%2020%20§%201286); [1987 c 528 § 9](http://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1987c528.pdf?cite=1987%20c%20528%20§%209); \]

## 70A.300.200 - Hazardous substance remedial actions—Procedural requirements not applicable.
The procedural requirements of this chapter shall not apply to any person conducting a remedial action at a facility pursuant to a consent decree, order, or agreed order issued pursuant to chapter 70A.305 RCW, or to the department of ecology when it conducts a remedial action under chapter 70A.305 RCW. The department of ecology shall ensure compliance with the substantive requirements of this chapter through the consent decree, order, or agreed order issued pursuant to chapter 70A.305 RCW, or during the department-conducted remedial action, through the procedures developed by the department pursuant to RCW 70A.305.090.

\[ [2020 c 20 § 1287](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/2019-20/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/House/2246-S.SL.pdf?cite=2020%20c%2020%20§%201287); [1994 c 257 § 17](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/1993-94/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/Senate/6339-S.SL.pdf?cite=1994%20c%20257%20§%2017); \]

## 70A.300.210 - Authority of attorney general.
At the request of the department, the attorney general is authorized to bring such injunctive, declaratory, or other actions to enforce any requirement of this chapter.

\[ [1980 c 144 § 2](http://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1980c144.pdf?cite=1980%20c%20144%20§%202); \]

## 70A.300.220 - Department's powers as designated agency under federal act.
1. The department is designated as the state agency for implementing the federal resource conservation and recovery act (42 U.S.C. Sec. 6901 et seq.).

2. The power granted to the department by this section is the authority to:

    a.  Establish a permit system for owners or operators of facilities which treat, store, or dispose of dangerous wastes: PROVIDED, That spent containers of pesticides or herbicides which have been used in normal farm operations and which are not extremely hazardous wastes, shall not be subject to the permit system;

    b.  Establish standards for the safe transport, treatment, storage, and disposal of dangerous wastes as may be necessary to protect human health and the environment;

    c.  Establish, to implement this section:

        i.  A manifest system to track dangerous wastes;

        ii.  Reporting, monitoring, recordkeeping, labeling, sampling requirements; and

        iii.  Owner, operator, and transporter responsibility;

    d.  Enter at reasonable times establishments regulated under this section for the purposes of inspection, monitoring, and sampling; and

    e.  Adopt rules necessary to implement this section.

\[ [1980 c 144 § 1](http://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1980c144.pdf?cite=1980%20c%20144%20§%201); \]

## 70A.300.230 - Copies of notification forms or annual reports to officials responsible for fire protection.
Any person who generates, treats, stores, disposes, or otherwise handles dangerous or extremely hazardous wastes shall provide copies of any notification forms, or annual reports that are required pursuant to RCW 70A.300.220 to the fire departments or fire districts that service the areas in which the wastes are handled upon the request of the fire departments or fire districts. In areas that are not serviced by a fire department or fire district, the forms or reports shall be provided to the sheriff or other county official designated pursuant to RCW 43.44.050 upon the request of the sheriff or other county official. This section shall not apply to the transportation of hazardous wastes.

\[ [2020 c 20 § 1288](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/2019-20/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/House/2246-S.SL.pdf?cite=2020%20c%2020%20§%201288); [1986 c 82 § 1](http://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1986c82.pdf?cite=1986%20c%2082%20§%201); \]

## 70A.300.240 - Rules implemented under RCW  70A.300.220—Review.
Rules implementing RCW 70A.300.220 shall be submitted to the house and senate committees on ecology for review prior to being adopted in accordance with chapter 34.05 RCW.

\[ [2020 c 20 § 1289](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/2019-20/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/House/2246-S.SL.pdf?cite=2020%20c%2020%20§%201289); [1980 c 144 § 3](http://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1980c144.pdf?cite=1980%20c%20144%20§%203); \]

## 70A.300.250 - Department's authority to participate in and administer federal act.
Notwithstanding any other provision of this chapter, the department of ecology is empowered to participate fully in and is empowered to administer all aspects of the programs of the federal Resource Conservation and Recovery Act, as it exists on June 7, 1984, (42 U.S.C. Sec. 6901 et seq.), contemplated for participation and administration by a state under that act.

\[ [2020 c 20 § 1290](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/2019-20/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/House/2246-S.SL.pdf?cite=2020%20c%2020%20§%201290); [1984 c 237 § 2](http://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1984c237.pdf?cite=1984%20c%20237%20§%202); [1983 c 270 § 2](http://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1983c270.pdf?cite=1983%20c%20270%20§%202); \]

## 70A.300.260 - Declaration—Management of hazardous waste—Priorities—Definitions.
The legislature hereby declares that:

1. The health and welfare of the people of the state depend on clean and pure environmental resources unaffected by hazardous waste contamination. Management and regulation of hazardous waste disposal should encourage practices which result in the least amount of waste being produced. Towards that end, the legislature finds that the following priorities in the management of hazardous waste are necessary and should be followed in order of descending priority as applicable:

    a.  Waste reduction;

    b.  Waste recycling;

    c.  Physical, chemical, and biological treatment;

    d.  Incineration;

    e.  Solidification/stabilization treatment;

    f.  Landfill.

2. As used in this section:

    a.  "Waste reduction" means reducing waste so that hazardous by-products are not produced;

    b.  "Waste recycling" means reusing waste materials and extracting valuable materials from a waste stream;

    c.  "Physical, chemical, and biological treatment" means processing the waste to render it completely innocuous, produce a recyclable by-product, reduce toxicity, or substantially reduce the volume of material requiring disposal;

    d.  "Incineration" means reducing the volume or toxicity of wastes by use of an enclosed device using controlled flame combustion;

    e.  "Solidification/stabilization treatment" means the use of encapsulation techniques to solidify wastes and make them less permeable or leachable; and

    f.  "Landfill" means a disposal facility, or part of a facility, at which waste is placed in or on land and which is not a land treatment facility, surface impoundment, or injection well.

\[ [1983 1st ex.s. c 70 § 1](http://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1983ex1c70.pdf?cite=1983%201st%20ex.s.%20c%2070%20§%201); \]

## 70A.300.270 - Waste management study—Public hearings—Adoption or modification of rules.
The department shall conduct a study to determine the best management practices for categories of waste for the priority waste management methods established in RCW 70A.300.260, with due consideration in the course of the study to sound environmental management and available technology. As an element of the study, the department shall review methods that will help achieve the priority of RCW 70A.300.260(1)(a), waste reduction. Before issuing any proposed rules, the department shall conduct public hearings regarding the best management practices for the various waste categories studied by the department. After conducting the study, the department shall prepare new rules or modify existing rules as appropriate to promote implementation of the priorities established in RCW 70A.300.260 for management practices which assure use of sound environmental management techniques and available technology. The preliminary study shall be completed by July 1, 1986, and the rules shall be adopted by July 1, 1987.

The studies shall be updated at least once every five years. The funding for these studies shall be from the model toxics control operating account created in RCW 70A.305.180, subject to legislative appropriation.

\[ [2020 c 20 § 1291](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/2019-20/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/House/2246-S.SL.pdf?cite=2020%20c%2020%20§%201291); [2010 1st sp.s. c 7 § 89](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/2009-10/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/House/2617-S2.SL.pdf?cite=2010%201st%20sp.s.%20c%207%20§%2089); [1998 c 245 § 110](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/1997-98/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/Senate/6219.SL.pdf?cite=1998%20c%20245%20§%20110); [1984 c 254 § 2](http://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1984c254.pdf?cite=1984%20c%20254%20§%202); [1983 1st ex.s. c 70 § 2](http://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1983ex1c70.pdf?cite=1983%201st%20ex.s.%20c%2070%20§%202); \]

## 70A.300.280 - Disposal of dangerous wastes at commercial off-site land disposal facilities—Limitations.
1. Independent of the processing or issuance of any or all federal, state, and local permits for disposal of dangerous wastes, no disposal of dangerous wastes at a commercial off-site land disposal facility may be undertaken prior to July 1, 1986, unless:

    a.  The disposal results from actions taken under *RCW 70.105A.060 (2) and (3), or results from other emergency situations; or

    b.  Studies undertaken by the department under RCW 70A.300.270 to determine the best management practices for various waste categories under the priority waste management methods established in RCW 70A.300.260 are completed for the particular wastes or waste categories to be disposed of and any regulatory revisions deemed necessary by the department are proposed and do not prohibit land disposal of such wastes; or

    c.  Final regulations have been adopted by the department that allow for such disposal.

2. Construction of facilities used solely for the purpose of disposal of wastes that have not met the requirements of subsection (1) of this section shall not be undertaken by any developer of a dangerous waste disposal facility.

3. The department shall prioritize the studies of waste categories undertaken under RCW 70A.300.270 to provide initial consideration of those categories most likely to be suitable for land disposal. Any regulatory changes deemed necessary by the department shall be proposed and subjected to the rule-making process by category as the study of each waste category is completed. All of the study shall be completed, and implementing regulations proposed, by July 1, 1986.

4. Any final permit issued by the department before the adoption of rules promulgated as a result of the study conducted under RCW 70A.300.270 shall be modified as necessary to be consistent with such rules.

\[ [2020 c 20 § 1292](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/2019-20/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/House/2246-S.SL.pdf?cite=2020%20c%2020%20§%201292); [1984 c 254 § 1](http://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1984c254.pdf?cite=1984%20c%20254%20§%201); \]

## 70A.300.290 - Waste management—Consultative services—Technical assistance—Confidentiality.
Consistent with the purposes of RCW 70A.300.260 and 70A.300.270, the department is authorized to promote the priority waste management methods listed in RCW 70A.300.260 by establishing or assisting in the establishment of: (1) Consultative services which, in conjunction with any business or industry requesting such service, study and recommend alternative waste management practices; and (2) technical assistance, such as a toll-free telephone service, to persons interested in waste management alternatives. Any person receiving such service or assistance may, in accordance with state law, request confidential treatment of information about their manufacturing or business practices.

\[ [2020 c 20 § 1293](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/2019-20/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/House/2246-S.SL.pdf?cite=2020%20c%2020%20§%201293); [1983 1st ex.s. c 70 § 3](http://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1983ex1c70.pdf?cite=1983%201st%20ex.s.%20c%2070%20§%203); \]

## 70A.300.300 - Disposition of fines and penalties—Earnings.
All fines and penalties collected under this chapter shall be deposited in the model toxics control operating account created in RCW 70A.305.180.

\[ [2020 c 20 § 1294](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/2019-20/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/House/2246-S.SL.pdf?cite=2020%20c%2020%20§%201294); [1985 c 57 § 70](http://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1985c57.pdf?cite=1985%20c%2057%20§%2070); [1983 1st ex.s. c 70 § 4](http://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1983ex1c70.pdf?cite=1983%201st%20ex.s.%20c%2070%20§%204); \]

## 70A.300.310 - Hazardous waste management plan.
1. The department shall develop, and shall update at least once every five years, a state hazardous waste management plan. The plan shall include, but shall not be limited to, the following elements:

    a.  A state inventory and assessment of the capacity of existing facilities to treat, store, dispose, or otherwise manage hazardous waste;

    b.  A forecast of future hazardous waste generation;

    c.  A description of the plan or program required by RCW 70A.300.270 to promote the waste management priorities established in RCW 70A.300.260;

    d.  Siting criteria as appropriate for hazardous waste management facilities, including such criteria as may be appropriate for the designation of eligible zones for designated zone facilities. However, these criteria shall not prevent the continued operation, at or below the present level of waste management activity, of existing facilities on the basis of their location in areas other than those designated as eligible zones pursuant to RCW 70A.300.370;

    e.  Siting policies as deemed appropriate by the department; and

    f.  A plan or program to provide appropriate public information and education relating to hazardous waste management. The department shall ensure to the maximum degree practical that these plans or programs are coordinated with public education programs carried out by local government under RCW 70A.300.350.

2. The department shall seek, encourage, and assist participation in the development, revision, and implementation of the state hazardous waste management plan by interested citizens, local government, business and industry, environmental groups, and other entities as appropriate.

3. Siting criteria shall be completed by December 31, 1986. Other plan components listed in subsection (1) of this section shall be completed by June 30, 1987.

4. The department shall incorporate into the state hazardous waste management plan those elements of the local hazardous waste management plans that it deems necessary to assure effective and coordinated programs throughout the state.

\[ [2020 c 20 § 1295](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/2019-20/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/House/2246-S.SL.pdf?cite=2020%20c%2020%20§%201295); [1985 c 448 § 4](http://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1985c448.pdf?cite=1985%20c%20448%20§%204); \]

## 70A.300.320 - Hazardous waste management facilities—Department to develop criteria for siting.
By May 31, 1990, the department shall develop and adopt criteria for the siting of hazardous waste management facilities. These criteria will be part of the state hazardous waste management plan as described in RCW 70A.300.310. To the extent practical, these criteria shall be designed to minimize the short-term and long-term risks and costs that may result from hazardous waste management facilities. These criteria may vary by type of facilities and may consider natural site characteristics and engineered protection. Criteria may be established for:

1. Geology;

2. Surface and groundwater hydrology;

3. Soils;

4. Flooding;

5. Climatic factors;

6. Unique or endangered flora and fauna;

7. Transportation routes;

8. Site access;

9. Buffer zones;

10. Availability of utilities and public services;

11. Compatibility with existing uses of land;

12. Shorelines and wetlands;

13. Sole-source aquifers;

14. Natural hazards; and

15. Other factors as determined by the department.

\[ [2020 c 20 § 1296](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/2019-20/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/House/2246-S.SL.pdf?cite=2020%20c%2020%20§%201296); [1989 1st ex.s. c 13 § 2](http://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1989ex1c13.pdf?cite=1989%201st%20ex.s.%20c%2013%20§%202); [1985 c 448 § 5](http://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1985c448.pdf?cite=1985%20c%20448%20§%205); \]

## 70A.300.330 - Department to adopt rules for permits for hazardous substances treatment facilities.
The legislature recognizes the need for new, modified, or expanded facilities to treat, incinerate, or otherwise process or dispose of hazardous substances safely. In order to encourage the development of such facilities, the department shall adopt rules as necessary regarding the permitting of such facilities to ensure the most expeditious permit processing possible consistent with the substantive requirements of applicable law. If owners and operators are not the same entity, the operator shall be the permit applicant and responsible for the development of the permit application and all accompanying materials, as long as the owner also signs the application and certifies its ownership of the real property described in the application, and acknowledges its awareness of the contents of the application and receipt of a copy thereof.

\[ [1986 c 210 § 3](http://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1986c210.pdf?cite=1986%20c%20210%20§%203); \]

## 70A.300.340 - Local government regulatory authority to prohibit or condition.
Nothing in this chapter shall alter or affect the regulatory authority of a county, city, or jurisdictional health district to condition or prohibit the acceptance of hazardous waste in a county or city landfill.

\[ [1994 c 254 § 7](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/1993-94/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/Senate/6123-S.SL.pdf?cite=1994%20c%20254%20§%207); \]

## 70A.300.350 - Local governments to prepare local hazardous waste plans—Basis—Elements required.
1. Each local government, or combination of contiguous local governments, is directed to prepare a local hazardous waste plan which shall be based on state guidelines and include the following elements:

    a.  A plan or program to manage moderate-risk wastes that are generated or otherwise present within the jurisdiction. This element shall include an assessment of the quantities, types, generators, and fate of moderate-risk wastes in the jurisdiction. The purpose of this element is to develop a system of managing moderate-risk waste, appropriate to each local area, to ensure protection of the environment and public health;

    b.  A plan or program to provide for ongoing public involvement and public education in regard to the management of moderate-risk waste. This element shall provide information regarding:

        i.  The potential hazards to human health and the environment resulting from improper use and disposal of the waste; and

        ii.  Proper methods of handling, reducing, recycling, and disposing of the waste;

    c.  An inventory of all existing generators of hazardous waste and facilities managing hazardous waste within the jurisdiction. This inventory shall be based on data provided by the department;

    d.  A description of the public involvement process used in developing the plan;

    e.  A description of the eligible zones designated in accordance with RCW 70A.300.370. However, the requirement to designate eligible zones shall not be considered part of the local hazardous waste planning requirements; and

    f.  Other elements as deemed appropriate by local government.

2. To the maximum extent practicable, the local hazardous waste plan shall be coordinated with other hazardous materials-related plans and policies in the jurisdiction.

3. Local governments shall coordinate with those persons involved in providing privately owned hazardous and moderate-risk waste facilities and services as follows: If a local government determines that a moderate-risk waste will be or is adequately managed by one or more privately owned facilities or services at a reasonable price, the local government shall take actions to encourage the use of that private facility or service. Actions taken by a local government under this subsection may include, but are not limited to, restricting or prohibiting the land disposal of a moderate-risk waste at any transfer station or land disposal facility within its jurisdiction.

4. [Empty]

    a.  The department shall prepare guidelines for the development of local hazardous waste plans. The guidelines shall be prepared in consultation with local governments and shall be completed by December 31, 1986. The guidelines shall include a list of substances identified as hazardous household substances.

    b.  In preparing the guidelines under (a) of this subsection, the department shall review and assess information on pilot projects that have been conducted for moderate-risk waste management. The department shall encourage additional pilot projects as needed to provide information to improve and update the guidelines.

5. The department shall consult with retailers, trade associations, public interest groups, and appropriate units of local government to encourage the development of voluntary public education programs on the proper handling of hazardous household substances.

6. Local hazardous waste plans shall be completed and submitted to the department no later than June 30, 1990. Local governments may from time to time amend the local plan.

7. Each local government, or combination of contiguous local governments, shall submit its local hazardous waste plan or amendments thereto to the department. The department shall approve or disapprove local hazardous waste plans or amendments by December 31, 1990, or within ninety days of submission, whichever is later. The department shall approve a local hazardous waste plan if it determines that the plan is consistent with this chapter and the guidelines under subsection (4) of this section. If approval is denied, the department shall submit its objections to the local government within ninety days of submission. However, for plans submitted between January 1, 1990, and June 30, 1990, the department shall have one hundred eighty days to submit its objections. No local government is eligible for grants under RCW 70A.300.390 for implementing a local hazardous waste plan unless the plan for that jurisdiction has been approved by the department.

8. Each local government, or combination of contiguous local governments, shall implement the local hazardous waste plan for its jurisdiction by December 31, 1991.

9. The department may waive the specific requirements of this section for any local government if such local government demonstrates to the satisfaction of the department that the objectives of the planning requirements have been met.

\[ [2020 c 20 § 1297](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/2019-20/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/House/2246-S.SL.pdf?cite=2020%20c%2020%20§%201297); [1992 c 17 § 1](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/1991-92/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/House/2633.SL.pdf?cite=1992%20c%2017%20§%201); [1986 c 210 § 1](http://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1986c210.pdf?cite=1986%20c%20210%20§%201); [1985 c 448 § 6](http://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1985c448.pdf?cite=1985%20c%20448%20§%206); \]

## 70A.300.360 - Local governments to prepare local hazardous waste plans—Used oil recycling element.
Local governments and combinations of local governments shall amend their local hazardous waste plans required under RCW 70A.300.350 to comply with RCW 70A.224.020.

\[ [2020 c 20 § 1298](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/2019-20/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/House/2246-S.SL.pdf?cite=2020%20c%2020%20§%201298); [1991 c 319 § 312](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/1991-92/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/Senate/5591-S2.SL.pdf?cite=1991%20c%20319%20§%20312); \]

## 70A.300.370 - Local governments to designate zones—Departmental guidelines—Approval of local government zone designations or amendments—Exemption.
1. Each local government, or combination of contiguous local governments, is directed to: (a) Demonstrate to the satisfaction of the department that existing zoning allows designated zone facilities as permitted uses; or (b) designate land use zones within its jurisdiction in which designated zone facilities are permitted uses. The zone designations shall be consistent with the state siting criteria adopted in accordance with RCW 70A.300.320, except as may be approved by the department in accordance with subsection (6) of this section.

2. Local governments shall not prohibit the processing or handling of hazardous waste in zones in which the processing or handling of hazardous substances is not prohibited. This subsection does not apply in residential zones.

3. The department shall prepare guidelines, as appropriate, for the designation of zones under this section. The guidelines shall be prepared in consultation with local governments and shall be completed by December 31, 1986.

4. The initial designation of zones shall be completed or revised, and submitted to the department within eighteen months after the enactment of siting criteria in accordance with RCW 70A.300.320. Local governments that do not comply with this submittal deadline shall be subject to the preemptive provisions of RCW 70A.300.400(4) until such time as zone designations are completed and approved by the department. Local governments may from time to time amend their designated zones.

5. Local governments without land use zoning provisions shall designate eligible geographic areas within their jurisdiction, based on siting criteria adopted in accordance with RCW 70A.300.320. The area designation shall be subject to the same requirements as if they were zone designations.

6. Each local government, or combination of contiguous local governments, shall submit its designation of zones or amendments thereto to the department. The department shall approve or disapprove zone designations or amendments within ninety days of submission. The department shall approve eligible zone designations if it determines that the proposed zone designations are consistent with this chapter, the applicable siting criteria, and guidelines for developing designated zones: PROVIDED, That the department shall consider local zoning in place as of January 1, 1985, or other special situations or conditions which may exist in the jurisdiction. If approval is denied, the department shall state within ninety days from the date of submission the facts upon which that decision is based and shall submit the statement to the local government together with any other comments or recommendations it deems appropriate. The local government shall have ninety days after it receives the statement from the department to make modifications designed to eliminate the inconsistencies and resubmit the designation to the department for approval. Any designations shall take effect when approved by the department.

7. The department may exempt a local government from the requirements of this section if:

    a.  Regulated quantities of hazardous waste have not been generated within the jurisdiction during the two calendar years immediately preceding the calendar year during which the exemption is requested; and

    b.  The local government can demonstrate to the satisfaction of the department that no significant portion of land within the jurisdiction can meet the siting criteria adopted in accordance with RCW 70A.300.320.

\[ [2020 c 20 § 1299](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/2019-20/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/House/2246-S.SL.pdf?cite=2020%20c%2020%20§%201299); [1989 1st ex.s. c 13 § 1](http://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1989ex1c13.pdf?cite=1989%201st%20ex.s.%20c%2013%20§%201); [1985 c 448 § 7](http://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1985c448.pdf?cite=1985%20c%20448%20§%207); \]

## 70A.300.380 - Local governments to submit letter of intent to identify or designate zones and submit management plans—Department to prepare plan in event of failure to act.
1. Each local government is directed to submit to the director of the department by October 31, 1987, a letter of intent stating that it intends to (a) identify, or designate if necessary, eligible zones for designated zone facilities no later than June 30, 1988, and (b) submit a complete local hazardous waste management plan to the department no later than June 30, 1990. The letters shall also indicate whether these requirements will be completed in conjunction with other local governments.

2. If any local government fails to submit a letter as provided in subsection (1)(b) of this section, or fails to adopt a local hazardous waste plan for its jurisdiction in accordance with the time schedule provided in this chapter, or fails to secure approval from the department for its local hazardous waste plan in accordance with the time schedule provided in this chapter, the department shall prepare a hazardous waste plan for the local jurisdiction.

\[ [1985 c 448 § 8](http://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1985c448.pdf?cite=1985%20c%20448%20§%208); \]

## 70A.300.390 - Grants to local governments for plan preparation, implementation, and designation of zones—Matching funds—Qualifications.
1. Subject to legislative appropriations, the department may make and administer grants to local governments for (a) preparing and updating local hazardous waste plans, (b) implementing approved local hazardous waste plans, and (c) designating eligible zones for designated zone facilities as required under this chapter.

2. Local governments shall match the funds provided by the department for planning or designating zones with an amount not less than twenty-five percent of the estimated cost of the work to be performed. Local governments may meet their share of costs with cash or contributed services. Local governments, or combination of contiguous local governments, conducting pilot projects pursuant to RCW 70A.300.350(4) may subtract the cost of those pilot projects conducted for hazardous household substances from their share of the cost. If a pilot project has been conducted for all moderate-risk wastes, only the portion of the cost that applies to hazardous household substances shall be subtracted. The matching funds requirement under this subsection shall be waived for local governments, or combination of contiguous local governments, that complete and submit their local hazardous waste plans under RCW 70A.300.350(6) prior to June 30, 1988.

3. Recipients of grants shall meet such qualifications and follow such procedures in applying for and using grants as may be established by the department.

\[ [2020 c 20 § 1300](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/2019-20/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/House/2246-S.SL.pdf?cite=2020%20c%2020%20§%201300); [1986 c 210 § 2](http://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1986c210.pdf?cite=1986%20c%20210%20§%202); [1985 c 448 § 9](http://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1985c448.pdf?cite=1985%20c%20448%20§%209); \]

## 70A.300.400 - State preemption—Department sole authority—Local requirements superseded—State authority over designated zone facilities.
1. As of July 28, 1985, the state preempts the field of state, regional, or local permitting and regulating of all preempted facilities as defined in this chapter. The department of ecology is designated the sole decision-making authority with respect to permitting and regulating such facilities and no other state agency, department, division, bureau, commission, or board, or any local or regional political subdivision of the state, shall have any permitting or regulatory authority with respect to such facilities including, but not limited to, the location, construction, and operation of such facilities. Permits issued by the department shall be in lieu of any and all permits, approvals, certifications, or conditions of any other state, regional, or local governmental authority which would otherwise apply.

2. The department shall ensure that any permits issued under this chapter invoking the preemption authority of this section meet the substantive requirements of existing state laws and regulations to the extent such laws and regulations are not inconsistent or in conflict with any of the provisions of this chapter. In the event that any of the provisions of this chapter, or any of the regulations promulgated hereunder, are in conflict with any other state law or regulations, such other law or regulations shall be deemed superseded for purposes of this chapter.

3. As of July 28, 1985, any ordinances, regulations, requirements, or restrictions of regional or local governmental authorities regarding the location, construction, or operation of preempted facilities shall be deemed superseded. However, in issuing permits under this section, the department shall consider local fire and building codes and condition such permits as appropriate in compliance therewith.

4. Effective July 1, 1988, the department shall have the same preemptive authority as defined in subsections (1) through (3) of this section in regard to any designated zone facility that may be proposed in any jurisdiction where the designation of eligible zones pursuant to RCW 70A.300.370 has not been completed and approved by the department. Unless otherwise preempted by this subsection, designated zone facilities shall be subject to all applicable state and local laws, regulations, plans, and other requirements.

\[ [2020 c 20 § 1301](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/2019-20/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/House/2246-S.SL.pdf?cite=2020%20c%2020%20§%201301); [1985 c 448 § 10](http://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1985c448.pdf?cite=1985%20c%20448%20§%2010); \]

## 70A.300.410 - Department may require notice of intent for management facility permit.
The department may adopt rules to require any person who intends to file an application for a permit for a hazardous waste management facility to file a notice of intent with the department prior to submitting the application.

\[ [1985 c 448 § 11](http://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1985c448.pdf?cite=1985%20c%20448%20§%2011); \]

## 70A.300.420 - Appeals to pollution control hearings board.
Any disputes between the department and the governing bodies of local governments in regard to the local planning requirements under RCW 70A.300.350 and the designation of zones under RCW 70A.300.370 may be appealed by the department or the governing body of the local government to the pollution control hearings board established under chapter 43.21B RCW.

\[ [2020 c 20 § 1302](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/2019-20/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/House/2246-S.SL.pdf?cite=2020%20c%2020%20§%201302); [1985 c 448 § 12](http://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1985c448.pdf?cite=1985%20c%20448%20§%2012); \]

## 70A.300.430 - Department to provide technical assistance with local plans.
The department shall provide technical assistance to local governments in the preparation, review, revision, and implementation of local hazardous waste plans.

\[ [1985 c 448 § 13](http://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1985c448.pdf?cite=1985%20c%20448%20§%2013); \]

## 70A.300.440 - Department to assist conflict resolution activities related to siting facilities—Agreements may constitute conditions for permit.
1. In order to promote identification, discussion, negotiation, and resolution of issues related to siting of hazardous waste management facilities, the department:

    a.  Shall compile and maintain information on the use and availability of conflict resolution techniques and make this information available to industries, state and local government officials, and other citizens;

    b.  Shall encourage and assist in facilitating conflict resolution activities, as appropriate, between facility proponents, host communities, and other interested persons;

    c.  May adopt rules specifying procedures for facility proponents, host communities, and citizens to follow in providing opportunities for conflict resolution activities, including the use of dispute resolution centers established pursuant to chapter 7.75 RCW; and

    d.  May expend funds to support such conflict resolution activities, and may adopt rules as appropriate to govern the support.

2. Any agreements reached under the processes described in subsection (1) of this section and deemed valid by the department may be written as conditions binding on a permit issued under this chapter.

\[ [1985 c 448 § 14](http://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1985c448.pdf?cite=1985%20c%20448%20§%2014); \]

## 70A.300.450 - Requirements of RCW  70A.300.310 through  70A.300.380 and  70A.300.400(4) not mandatory without legislative appropriation.
The requirements of RCW 70A.300.310 through 70A.300.380 and 70A.300.400(4) shall not become mandatory until funding is appropriated by the legislature.

\[ [2020 c 20 § 1303](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/2019-20/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/House/2246-S.SL.pdf?cite=2020%20c%2020%20§%201303); [1985 c 448 § 15](http://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1985c448.pdf?cite=1985%20c%20448%20§%2015); \]

## 70A.300.460 - Service charges.
1. The department may assess reasonable service charges against those facilities that store, treat, incinerate, or dispose of dangerous or extremely hazardous waste that contains both a nonradioactive hazardous component and a radioactive component or which are undergoing closure under this chapter in those instances where closure entails the physical characterization of remaining wastes which contain both a nonradioactive hazardous component and a radioactive component or the management of such wastes through treatment or removal, except any commercial low-level radioactive waste facility. Service charges may not exceed the costs to the department in carrying out the duties of this section.

2. Program elements or activities for which service charges may be assessed include:

    a.  Office, staff, and staff support for the purposes of facility or unit permit development, review, and issuance; and

    b.  Actions taken to determine and ensure compliance with the state's hazardous waste management act.

3. Moneys collected through the imposition of such service charges shall be deposited in the radioactive mixed waste account created in RCW 70A.300.480.

4. The department shall adopt rules necessary to implement this section. Facilities that store, treat, incinerate, or dispose of dangerous or extremely hazardous waste that contains both a nonradioactive hazardous component and a radioactive component shall not be subject to service charges prior to such rule making. Facilities undergoing closure under this chapter in those instances where closure entails the physical characterization of remaining wastes which contain both a nonradioactive hazardous component and a radioactive component or the management of such wastes through treatment or removal shall not be subject to service charges prior to such rule making.

\[ [2020 c 20 § 1304](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/2019-20/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/House/2246-S.SL.pdf?cite=2020%20c%2020%20§%201304); [2013 2nd sp.s. c 1 § 14](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/2013-14/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/Senate/5296-S2.SL.pdf?cite=2013%202nd%20sp.s.%20c%201%20§%2014); [1989 c 376 § 2](http://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1989c376.pdf?cite=1989%20c%20376%20§%202); \]

## 70A.300.470 - Metals mining and milling operations permits—Inspections by department of ecology.
If a metals mining and milling operation is issued a permit pursuant to this chapter, then it will be subject to special inspection requirements. The department of ecology shall inspect these mining operations at least quarterly in order to ensure that the operation is in compliance with the conditions of any permit issued to it pursuant to this chapter. The department shall conduct additional inspections during the construction phase of the mining operation in order to ensure compliance with this chapter.

\[ [1994 c 232 § 19](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/1993-94/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/House/2521-S.SL.pdf?cite=1994%20c%20232%20§%2019); \]

## 70A.300.480 - Radioactive mixed waste account.
The radioactive mixed waste account is created within the state treasury. All receipts received from facilities assessed service charges established under RCW 70A.300.460 must be deposited into the account. Moneys in the account may be spent only after appropriation. Expenditures from the account may only be used for carrying out the department's powers and duties under this chapter related to the regulation of facilities that treat, store, or dispose of mixed waste or mixed waste facilities that are undergoing closure.

\[ [2020 c 20 § 1305](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/2019-20/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/House/2246-S.SL.pdf?cite=2020%20c%2020%20§%201305); [2013 2nd sp.s. c 1 § 12](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/2013-14/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/Senate/5296-S2.SL.pdf?cite=2013%202nd%20sp.s.%20c%201%20§%2012); \]

## 70A.300.900 - Short title—1985 c 448.
This chapter shall be known and may be cited as the hazardous waste management act.

\[ [1985 c 448 § 16](http://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1985c448.pdf?cite=1985%20c%20448%20§%2016); \]

