# 70A.60 - Hydrofluorocarbons—Emissions reduction.
* [70A.60.005 - Finding—Intent.](#70a60005---findingintent)
* [70A.60.010 - Definitions.](#70a60010---definitions)
* [70A.60.020 - Refrigerant substitutes—Limitations—Rule making. (Effective January 1, 2022.)](#70a60020---refrigerant-substituteslimitationsrule-making-effective-january-1-2022)
* [70A.60.030 - Refrigerant management program—Rules—Fees.](#70a60030---refrigerant-management-programrulesfees)
* [70A.60.040 - Department's authority.](#70a60040---departments-authority)
* [70A.60.050 - Refrigerant emission management account.](#70a60050---refrigerant-emission-management-account)
* [70A.60.060 - Prohibited products and equipment—Department's rule-making authority—Disclosure of substitutes used in products or equipment.](#70a60060---prohibited-products-and-equipmentdepartments-rule-making-authoritydisclosure-of-substitutes-used-in-products-or-equipment)
* [70A.60.070 - Recovery of regulated refrigerants.](#70a60070---recovery-of-regulated-refrigerants)
* [70A.60.080 - Regulated refrigerants—Substitutes—Nonessential consumer products containing hydrofluorocarbons—Limitation on sale or purchase.](#70a60080---regulated-refrigerantssubstitutesnonessential-consumer-products-containing-hydrofluorocarbonslimitation-on-sale-or-purchase)
* [70A.60.090 - Refrigerants—Rules.](#70a60090---refrigerantsrules)
## 70A.60.005 - Finding—Intent.
1. The legislature finds that hydrofluorocarbons are air pollutants that pose significant threats to our environment. Although hydrofluorocarbons currently represent a small proportion of the state's greenhouse gas emissions, emissions of hydrofluorocarbons have been rapidly increasing in the United States and worldwide, and they are hundreds to thousands of times more potent than carbon dioxide. In 2019, the legislature took a significant step towards reducing greenhouse gas emissions from hydrofluorocarbons by transitioning to the use of less damaging hydrofluorocarbons or suitable substitutes in certain new foam, aerosol, and refrigerant uses. However, significant sources of hydrofluorocarbon emissions in Washington remain unaddressed by the 2019 legislation, including legacy uses of hydrofluorocarbons as a refrigerant in infrastructure that was installed prior to the effective dates of the restrictions in the 2019 law, and from sources like stationary air conditioners and heat pumps that were not covered by the 2019 law.

2. Therefore, it is the intent of the legislature to reduce hydrofluorocarbon emissions, including by:

   a. Authorizing the establishment of a maximum global warming potential threshold for hydrofluorocarbons used as a refrigerant;

   b. Authorizing the regulation of hydrofluorocarbons in air conditioning and heat pumps;

   c. Applying the same basic emission control requirements to hydrofluorocarbons that have long applied to ozone-depleting substances used as refrigerants;

   d. Establishing a program to reduce leaks and encourage refrigerant recovery from large refrigeration and air conditioning systems;

   e. Directing the state building code council to adopt codes that are consistent with the goal of reducing greenhouse gas emissions associated with hydrofluorocarbons;

   f. Establishing a state procurement preference for recycled refrigerants; and

   g. Allowing consideration of the global warming potential of refrigerants used in equipment incentivized under utility conservation programs.

3. Furthermore, it is the intent of the legislature that the ice rink used by Seattle's newest hockey franchise, the Seattle Kraken, should be as cold as possible, but also should be refrigerated using climate-friendly refrigerants, so that on opening night of the 2021-2022 National Hockey League season, as many fans as possible can simultaneously yell the Pacific Northwest's favorite new phrase: 'Release the Kraken!'

\[ [2021 c 315 § 1](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/2021-22/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/House/1050-S2.SL.pdf?cite=2021%20c%20315%20§%201); \]

## 70A.60.010 - Definitions.
1. [Empty]

   a. "Air conditioning" means the process of treating air to meet the requirements of a conditioned space by controlling its temperature, humidity, cleanliness, or distribution.

   b. [Empty]

      i. "Air conditioning" includes chillers, except for purposes of RCW 70A.60.020.

      ii. "Air conditioning" includes heat pumps.

   c. "Air conditioning" applies to stationary air conditioning equipment and does not apply to mobile air conditioning, including those used in motor vehicles, rail and trains, aircraft, watercraft, recreational vehicles, recreational trailers, and campers.

2. "Class I substance" and "class II substance" means those substances listed in 42 U.S.C. Sec. 7671a, as of November 15, 1990, or those substances listed in Appendix A or B of Subpart A of 40 C.F.R. Part 82, as of January 3, 2017.

3. "Department" means the department of ecology.

4. "Hydrofluorocarbons" means a class of greenhouse gases that are saturated organic compounds containing hydrogen, fluorine, and carbon.

5. "Ice rink" means a frozen body of water, hardened chemicals, or both, including, but not limited to, professional ice skating rinks and those used by the general public for recreational purposes.

6. "Manufacturer" includes any person, firm, association, partnership, corporation, governmental entity, organization, or joint venture that produces any product that contains or uses hydrofluorocarbons or is an importer or domestic distributor of such a product.

7. "Person" means an individual, partnership, franchise holder, association, corporation, a state, a city, a county, or any subdivision or instrumentality of the state.

8. "Refrigeration equipment" or "refrigeration system" means any stationary device that is designed to contain and use refrigerant. "Refrigeration equipment" includes refrigeration equipment used in retail food, cold storage, industrial process refrigeration and cooling that does not use a chiller, ice rinks, and other refrigeration applications.

9. "Regulated refrigerant" means a class I or class II substance as listed in Title VI of section 602 of the federal clean air act amendments of November 15, 1990.

10. "Residential consumer refrigeration products" has the same meaning as defined in section 430.2 of Subpart A of 10 C.F.R. Part 430 (2017).

11. "Retrofit" has the same meaning as defined in section 152 of Subpart F of 40 C.F.R. Part 82, as that section existed as of January 3, 2017.

12. "Substitute" means a chemical, product, or alternative manufacturing process, whether existing or new, that is used to perform a function previously performed by a class I substance or class II substance and any chemical, product, or alternative manufacturing process subsequently developed, adapted, or adopted to perform that function including, but not limited to, hydrofluorocarbons. "Substitute" does not include 2-BTP or any compound as applied to its use in aerospace fire extinguishing systems.

\[ [2021 c 315 § 2](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/2021-22/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/House/1050-S2.SL.pdf?cite=2021%20c%20315%20§%202); \]

## 70A.60.020 - Refrigerant substitutes—Limitations—Rule making. (Effective January 1, 2022.)
1. Within 12 months of another state's enactment or adoption of restrictions on substitutes applicable to new light-duty vehicles, the department may adopt restrictions applicable to the sale, lease, rental, or other introduction into commerce by a manufacturer of new light-duty vehicles consistent with the restrictions identified in appendix B, Subpart G of 40 C.F.R. Part 82, as of January 3, 2017. The department may apply an effective date to the restrictions adopted under this subsection that differs from the effective date of the restrictions adopted by another state, but the department may not adopt restrictions that take effect prior to the effective date of restrictions adopted or enacted in at least one other state.

2. The department may adopt rules that establish a maximum global warming potential of 750 for substitutes used in new stationary air conditioning. Rules adopted under this subsection may not take effect prior to:

   a. January 1, 2023, for dehumidifiers and room air conditioners;

   b. [Empty]

      i. January 1, 2025, for other types of stationary air conditioning equipment, but only if before January 1, 2023, the state building code council adopts the following safety standards into the state building code as these standards existed as of January 1, 2022:

         A.  American society of heating, refrigerating, and air-conditioning engineers standard 15;

         B.  American society of heating, refrigerating, and air-conditioning engineers standard 15.2;

         C.  American society of heating, refrigerating, and air-conditioning engineers standard 34; and

         D.  Underwriters laboratories standard UL 60335-2-40 edition 4;

      ii. If the state building code council adopts the safety standards referenced in (b)(i) of this subsection after January 1, 2023, the restrictions of this subsection may apply to refrigeration equipment manufactured no earlier than 24 months after the adoption of the safety standards; and

   c. January 1, 2026, for systems with variable refrigerant flow or volume.

3. [Empty]

   a. Consistent with the timeline established in (b) of this subsection, the department may adopt rules to prohibit the use of refrigerant substitutes that have a global warming potential of greater than 150 for use in refrigeration equipment containing more than 50 pounds of refrigerant;

   b. [Empty]

      i. The restrictions in (a) of this subsection must apply to new refrigeration equipment manufactured after December 31, 2024, but only if before January 1, 2023, the state building code council adopts the following safety standards into the state building code, as these standards existed as of January 1, 2022:

         A.  American society of heating, refrigerating, and air-conditioning engineers standard 15;

         B.  American society of heating, refrigerating, and air-conditioning engineers standard 34; and

         C.  Underwriters laboratories standard UL 60335-2-89 edition 2;

      ii. If the state building code council adopts the safety standards referenced in (b)(i) of this subsection after January 1, 2023, the restrictions of (a) of this subsection may apply to refrigeration equipment manufactured no earlier than 24 months after the adoption of the safety standards.

4. The department shall prohibit the use of refrigerant substitutes that have a global warming potential of greater than:

   a. One hundred fifty for use in new equipment manufactured after December 31, 2023, for installation in new ice rinks; and

   b. Seven hundred fifty for use in new equipment manufactured after December 31, 2023, for installation in existing ice rinks.

5. [Empty]

   a. The department, in rules adopted to implement this section, may establish reporting, labeling, and recordkeeping requirements applicable to regulated facilities and persons. To the extent practicable, rules adopted under this section must be harmonized with reporting, labeling, or recordkeeping requirements established under RCW 70A.60.030.

   b. To the extent practicable, the department must adopt rules to implement this section that are consistent with similar programs in other states that reduce emissions from refrigerants.

   c. The department may adopt rules to grant variances from the requirements of this section.

   d. Restrictions adopted by the department under this section are additional to specific restrictions on applications and end uses established in RCW 70A.60.060.

6. [Empty]

   a. Prior to adopting final rules to implement restrictions under subsection (2) or (3) of this section, the department must review the availability and affordability of:

      i. Equipment that meets applicable global warming potential requirements;

      ii. Refrigerants that meet applicable global warming potential requirements; and

      iii. Appropriate training to utilize equipment that meets applicable global warming potential requirements.

   b. After the review required under (a) of this subsection, the department is encouraged to consider delaying the effective date of restrictions under this section in the event that the department determines that significant training or compliant equipment or refrigerant availability and affordability limitations are expected to occur.

\[ [2021 c 315 § 8](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/2021-22/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/House/1050-S2.SL.pdf?cite=2021%20c%20315%20§%208); \]

## 70A.60.030 - Refrigerant management program—Rules—Fees.
1. The department shall establish a refrigerant management program designed to reduce emissions of refrigerants, including regulated substances and their substitutes, from activities or equipment responsible for significant volumes of such emissions. The program must include, at minimum, larger stationary refrigeration systems and larger commercial air conditioning systems. The department must adopt rules to implement and enforce the requirements of this section. The department may require compliance with refrigerant management program requirements beginning no earlier than January 1, 2024, and no earlier than the adjournment of the regular legislative session following the submission of a report to the appropriate committees of the legislature by the department estimating leakage of refrigerants from existing systems in Washington, and estimating a statewide rate of leakage from the categories of systems that are subject to the refrigerant management program rules adopted by the department under this section.

2. [Empty]

   a. The department shall exempt refrigeration and air conditioning equipment operations associated with de minimis emissions or with a de minimis charging capacity of less than 50 pounds in a single system from registration, reporting, and leak detection requirements established in this section. The department shall exempt from the requirements established in this section equipment that uses refrigerants with a global warming potential of less than 150 and that are not class I or class II substances.

   b. The department may scale the requirements adopted under this section based on the size of the equipment, the facility containing the equipment, or the business operations of a person responsible for such emissions. The department may establish delayed effective dates of requirements applicable to persons and systems associated with lower emissions of refrigerants than other persons and systems regulated under this section.

3. Each year, the owner or operator of a stationary refrigeration system or air conditioning system that exceeds a de minimis charge capacity of 50 pounds must register with the department. The department must phase in system registration requirements under this subsection in order to prioritize systems with the largest charge capacity or greatest potential for refrigerant emissions. Registration with the department must, consistent with rules adopted by the department, include the submission of information about the refrigeration system, including equipment type, refrigerant charge capacity, and the type of refrigerant used.

4. Prior to the sale of a registered refrigeration or air conditioning system, the owners or operators of the system must provide leak rate documentation to the prospective purchaser.

5. The owner or operator of a registered stationary refrigeration system or air conditioning system must conduct periodic leak-detection inspections of the system. The department may require inspections to be conducted with relatively greater frequency for systems with larger volumes of refrigerants. The department may exempt systems that use refrigerants with low global warming potential or that have automatic leak-detection systems from the requirements of this subsection.

6. The owner or operator of a registered stationary refrigeration or air conditioning system must inspect for leaks each time significant amounts of refrigerant are added to the system.

7. The department must adopt rules that:

   a. Require refrigeration or air conditioning systems found to be leaking to be repaired within a specified amount of time;

   b. Require the retrofit, replacement, or retirement of a refrigeration or air conditioning system with a leak that is not capable of being repaired;

   c. Establish annual reporting requirements for owners or operators of refrigeration systems or air conditioning systems that include information about the system, including system service and leak repair conducted on the system over the preceding year, and information on the purchase and use of refrigerants in the covered system during the preceding year;

   d. Establish annual reporting requirement for refrigerant wholesalers, distributors, and reclaimers;

   e. Establish record retention requirements for operators of facilities and wholesalers, distributors, and reclaimers of refrigerants and substitutes;

   f. Apply leak rates and other regulatory thresholds that achieve greater emission reductions than the federal regulations adopted by the United States environmental protection agency, and that reflect levels of achievable superior performance established for the greenchill voluntary program implemented by the United States environmental protection agency; and

   g. To the maximum extent practicable while giving consideration to the goals of this chapter, establish recordkeeping and reporting requirements that are consistent with programs implemented by the federal environmental protection agency or in other states, and that minimize compliance costs and regulatory burdens for regulated parties.

8. The department may adopt rules to establish:

   a. Service practices for stationary appliances, including both stationary refrigeration systems and air conditioning systems. Service practices established by the department may include requiring technicians certified under United States environmental protection agency standards to service refrigerant systems, requiring reporting and recordkeeping that identifies the technicians that have serviced appliances, prohibiting practices likely to result in releases to the environment, requiring all practicable efforts to recover refrigerants from covered systems, and prohibiting the addition of refrigerants to systems known to have a leak; and

   b. A process for wholesalers, distributors, reclaimers, and refrigeration and air conditioning equipment operators to apply to the department for an exemption from some or all of the requirements of this section. Exemptions may be granted by the department on the basis of economic hardship, natural disaster, or after considering a calculation of life-cycle greenhouse gas emissions associated with the granting of an exemption that will allow an identified leak to go unrepaired for a finite period of time.

9. The department may determine, assess, and collect annual fees from the owners or operators of refrigeration and air conditioning systems regulated under this section in an amount sufficient to cover the direct and indirect costs of administering and enforcing the provisions of this section. All fees collected under this subsection must be deposited in the refrigerant emission management account created in RCW 70A.60.050.

10. By December 1, 2029, and every five years thereafter, the department must consider the greenhouse gas emissions reductions achieved under the program created in this section and the criteria of RCW 70A.60.040(3), and make a determination whether to continue to implement the program for the following five years. The department must notify the appropriate committees of the house of representatives and the senate of its determination.

\[ [2021 c 315 § 9](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/2021-22/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/House/1050-S2.SL.pdf?cite=2021%20c%20315%20§%209); \]

## 70A.60.040 - Department's authority.
1. The authority granted by this chapter to the department for restricting the use of substitutes is supplementary to the department's authority to control air pollution pursuant to chapter 70A.15 RCW. Nothing in this chapter limits the authority of the department under chapter 70A.15 RCW.

2. The department, in enforcing the requirements of this chapter, must adhere to the provisions applicable to the department under chapter 43.05 RCW regarding site inspections, technical assistance visits, notices of correction, and the issuance of civil penalties, to the extent that these provisions are not in conflict with federal requirements described in RCW 43.05.901.

3. The department may elect to refrain from or cease administering or enforcing a requirement of this chapter if the United States environmental protection agency adopts requirements that:

   a. Are substantially duplicative of the requirements of this chapter and that negate the additional emission reduction benefits of state implementation of any requirement of this chapter; or

   b. Preempt state authority under this chapter.

\[ [2021 c 315 § 11](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/2021-22/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/House/1050-S2.SL.pdf?cite=2021%20c%20315%20§%2011); \]

## 70A.60.050 - Refrigerant emission management account.
The refrigerant emission management account is created in the state treasury. All receipts received by the state from the fees imposed under RCW 70A.60.030 must be deposited in the account. Moneys in the account may be spent only after appropriation. Expenditures from the account may be used only to develop and implement the provisions of RCW 70A.60.030.

\[ [2021 c 315 § 12](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/2021-22/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/House/1050-S2.SL.pdf?cite=2021%20c%20315%20§%2012); \]

## 70A.60.060 - Prohibited products and equipment—Department's rule-making authority—Disclosure of substitutes used in products or equipment.
1. A person may not offer any product or equipment for sale, lease, or rent, or install or otherwise cause any equipment or product to enter into commerce in Washington if that equipment or product consists of, uses, or will use a substitute, as set forth in appendix U and V, Subpart G of 40 C.F.R. Part 82, as those read on January 3, 2017, for the applications or end uses restricted by appendix U or V of the federal regulation, as those read on January 3, 2017, consistent with the deadlines established in subsection (2) of this section. Except where existing equipment is retrofit, nothing in this subsection requires a person that acquired a restricted product or equipment prior to the effective date of the restrictions in subsection (2) of this section to cease use of that product or equipment. Products or equipment manufactured prior to the applicable effective date of the restrictions specified in subsection (2) of this section may be sold, imported, exported, distributed, installed, and used after the specified effective date.

2. The restrictions under subsection (1) of this section for the following products and equipment identified in appendix U and V, Subpart G of 40 C.F.R. Part 82, as those read on January 3, 2017, take effect beginning:

   a. January 1, 2020, for:

      i. Propellants;

      ii. Rigid polyurethane applications and spray foam, flexible polyurethane, integral skin polyurethane, flexible polyurethane foam, polystyrene extruded sheet, polyolefin, phenolic insulation board, and bunstock;

      iii. Supermarket systems, remote condensing units, and stand-alone units;

   b. January 1, 2021, for:

      i. Refrigerated food processing and dispensing equipment;

      ii. Compact residential consumer refrigeration products;

      iii. Polystyrene extruded boardstock and billet, and rigid polyurethane low-pressure two component spray foam;

   c. January 1, 2022, for:

      i. Residential consumer refrigeration products other than compact and built-in residential consumer refrigeration products; and

      ii. Vending machines;

   d. January 1, 2023, for cold storage warehouses;

   e. January 1, 2023, for built-in residential consumer refrigeration products;

   f. January 1, 2024, for centrifugal chillers and positive displacement chillers; and

   g. On either January 1, 2020, or the effective date of the restrictions identified in appendix U and V, Subpart G of 40 C.F.R. Part 82, as those read on January 3, 2017, whichever comes later, for all other applications and end uses for substitutes not covered by the categories listed in (a) through (f) of this subsection.

3. The department may by rule:

   a. Modify the effective date of a prohibition established in subsection (2) of this section if the department determines that the rule reduces the overall risk to human health or the environment and reflects the earliest date that a substitute is currently or potentially available;

   b. Prohibit the use of a substitute if the department determines that the prohibition reduces the overall risk to human health or the environment and that a lower risk substitute is currently or potentially available;

   c. [Empty]

      i. Adopt a list of approved substitutes, use conditions, or use limits, if any; and

      ii. Add or remove substitutes, use conditions, or use limits to or from the list of approved substitutes if the department determines those substitutes reduce the overall risk to human health and the environment; and

   d. Designate acceptable uses of hydrofluorocarbons for medical uses that are exempt from the requirements of subsection (2) of this section.

4. The department shall adopt rules requiring that manufacturers disclose the substitutes used in their products or equipment or to disclose the compliance status of their products or equipment. That disclosure must take the form of:

   a. A label on the equipment or product. The label must meet requirements designated by the department by rule. To the extent feasible, the department must recognize existing labeling that provides sufficient disclosure of the use of substitutes in the product or equipment or of the compliance status of the products or equipment.

      i. The department must consider labels required by state building codes and other safety standards in its rule making; and

      ii. The department may not require labeling of aircraft and aircraft components subject to certification requirements of the federal aviation administration.

   b. Submitting information about the use of substitutes to the department, upon request.

      i. By December 31, 2019, all manufacturers must notify the department of the status of each product class utilizing hydrofluorocarbons or other substitutes restricted under subsection (1) of this section that the manufacturer sells, offers for sale, leases, installs, or rents in Washington state. This status notification must identify the substitutes used by products or equipment in each product or equipment class in a manner determined by rule by the department.

      ii. Within one hundred twenty days after the date of a restriction put in place under this section, any manufacturer affected by the restriction must provide an updated status notification. This notification must indicate whether the manufacturer has ceased the use of hydrofluorocarbons or substitutes restricted under this section within each product class and, if not, what hydrofluorocarbons or other restricted substitutes remain in use.

      iii. After the effective date of a restriction put in place under this section, any manufacturer must provide an updated status notification when the manufacturer introduces a new or modified product or piece of equipment that uses hydrofluorocarbons or changes the type of hydrofluorocarbons utilized within a product class affected by a restriction. Such a notification must occur within one hundred twenty days of the introduction into commerce in Washington of the product or equipment triggering this notification requirement.

   c. Alternative disclosure requirements to (a) of this subsection, if the department determines that the inclusion of a label denoting substitutes used or compliance status is not feasible for a particular product or equipment.

5. The department may adopt rules to administer, implement, and enforce this section. If the department elects to adopt rules, the department must seek, where feasible and appropriate, to adopt rules, including rules under subsection (4) of this section, that are the same or consistent with the regulatory standards, exemptions, reporting obligations, disclosure requirements, and other compliance requirements of other states or the federal government that have adopted restrictions on the use of hydrofluorocarbons and other substitutes. Prior to the adoption or update of a rule under this section, the department must identify the sources of information it relied upon, including peer-reviewed science.

6. For the purposes of implementing the restrictions specified in appendix U of Subpart G of 40 C.F.R. Part 82, as it read on January 3, 2017, consistent with this section, the department must interpret the term "aircraft maintenance" to mean activities to support the production, fabrication, manufacture, rework, inspection, maintenance, overhaul, or repair of commercial, civil, or military aircraft, aircraft parts, aerospace vehicles, or aerospace components.

7. Except where existing equipment is retrofit, the restrictions of this section do not apply to or limit any use of commercial refrigeration equipment that was installed or in use prior to the effective date of the restrictions established in this section.

\[ [2021 c 315 § 7](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/2021-22/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/House/1050-S2.SL.pdf?cite=2021%20c%20315%20§%207); [2020 c 20 § 1404](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/2019-20/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/House/2246-S.SL.pdf?cite=2020%20c%2020%20§%201404); [2019 c 284 § 3](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/2019-20/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/House/1112-S2.SL.pdf?cite=2019%20c%20284%20§%203); \]

## 70A.60.070 - Recovery of regulated refrigerants.
1. A person who services or repairs or disposes of a motor vehicle air conditioning system; commercial or industrial air conditioning, heating, or refrigeration system; or consumer appliance shall use refrigerant extraction equipment to recover regulated refrigerants and substitutes that would otherwise be released into the atmosphere.

2. Upon request, the department shall provide information and assistance to persons interested in collecting, transporting, or recycling regulated refrigerants and substitutes.

3. The willful release of regulated refrigerants and substitutes from a source listed in subsection (1) of this section is prohibited.

\[ [2021 c 315 § 4](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/2021-22/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/House/1050-S2.SL.pdf?cite=2021%20c%20315%20§%204); [1991 c 199 § 602](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/1991-92/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/House/1028-S.SL.pdf?cite=1991%20c%20199%20§%20602); \]

## 70A.60.080 - Regulated refrigerants—Substitutes—Nonessential consumer products containing hydrofluorocarbons—Limitation on sale or purchase.
No person may sell, offer for sale, or purchase any of the following:

1. A substitute with a global warming potential of greater than 150 or a regulated refrigerant in a container designed for consumer recharge of a motor vehicle air conditioning system or consumer appliance during repair or service;

2. Nonessential consumer products that contain hydrofluorocarbons with a global warming potential of greater than 150 and chlorofluorocarbons or other ozone-depleting chemicals, and for which suitable alternatives are readily available. Products affected under this subsection shall include, but are not limited to, party streamers, tire inflators, air horns, noise makers, and cleaning sprays designed for noncommercial or nonindustrial cleaning of electronic or photographic equipment. Products and equipment subject to restrictions on applications or end uses under RCW 70A.60.060 are not nonessential products for which hydrofluorocarbons are restricted under this section.

\[ [2021 c 315 § 5](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/2021-22/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/House/1050-S2.SL.pdf?cite=2021%20c%20315%20§%205); [1991 c 199 § 603](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/1991-92/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/House/1028-S.SL.pdf?cite=1991%20c%20199%20§%20603); \]

## 70A.60.090 - Refrigerants—Rules.
The department shall adopt rules to implement RCW 70A.60.070 and 70A.60.080. Rules shall include but not be limited to minimum performance specifications for refrigerant extraction equipment, procedures under which owners or operators of stationary refrigeration equipment and air conditioning equipment subject to the requirements of RCW 70A.60.030 must provide the department with information related to their use of regulated refrigerants and substitutes, as well as procedures for enforcing RCW 70A.60.070, 70A.60.080, and 70A.60.020.

\[ [2021 c 315 § 6](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/2021-22/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/House/1050-S2.SL.pdf?cite=2021%20c%20315%20§%206); [2020 c 20 § 1160](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/2019-20/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/House/2246-S.SL.pdf?cite=2020%20c%2020%20§%201160); [1991 c 199 § 604](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/1991-92/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/House/1028-S.SL.pdf?cite=1991%20c%20199%20§%20604); \]

