# 70A.390 - Radioactive waste storage and transportation act of 1980.
* [70A.390.010 - Finding.](#70a390010---finding)
* [70A.390.020 - Definitions.](#70a390020---definitions)
* [70A.390.030 - Storage of radioactive waste from outside the state prohibited—Exceptions.](#70a390030---storage-of-radioactive-waste-from-outside-the-state-prohibitedexceptions)
* [70A.390.040 - Transportation of radioactive waste from outside the state for storage within the state prohibited—Exception.](#70a390040---transportation-of-radioactive-waste-from-outside-the-state-for-storage-within-the-state-prohibitedexception)
* [70A.390.050 - Violations—Penalties—Injunctions—Jurisdiction and venue—Fees and costs.](#70a390050---violationspenaltiesinjunctionsjurisdiction-and-venuefees-and-costs)
* [70A.390.060 - Interstate compact for regional storage.](#70a390060---interstate-compact-for-regional-storage)
* [70A.390.900 - Construction—1981 c 1.](#70a390900---construction1981-c-1)
* [70A.390.901 - Short title.](#70a390901---short-title)
## 70A.390.010 - Finding.
The people of the state of Washington find that:

1. Radioactive wastes are highly dangerous, in that releases of radioactive materials and emissions to the environment are inimical to the health and welfare of the people of the state of Washington, and contribute to the occurrences of harmful diseases, including excessive cancer and leukemia. The dangers posed by the transportation and presence of radioactive wastes are increased further by the long time periods that the wastes remain radioactive and highly dangerous;

2. Transporting, handling, storing, or otherwise caring for radioactive waste presents a hazard to the health, safety, and welfare of the individual citizens of the state of Washington because of the ever-present risk that an accident or incident will occur while the wastes are being cared for;

3. The likelihood that an accident will occur in this state involving the release of radioactive wastes to the environment becomes greater as the volume of wastes transported, handled, stored, or otherwise cared for in this state increases;

4. The effects of unplanned releases of radioactive wastes into the environment, especially into the air and water of the state, are potentially both widespread and harmful to the health, safety, and welfare of the citizens of this state.

The burdens and hazards posed by increasing the volume of radioactive wastes transported, handled, stored, or otherwise cared for in this state by the importation of such wastes from outside this state is not a hazard the state government may reasonably ask its citizens to bear. The people of the state of Washington believe that the principles of federalism do not require the sacrifice of the health, safety, and welfare of the people of one state for the convenience of other states or nations.

\[ 1981 c 1 § 1 (Initiative Measure No. 383, approved November 4, 1980); \]

## 70A.390.020 - Definitions.
The definitions set forth in this section apply throughout this chapter.

1. "Radioactive waste" means unwanted radioactive material, including radioactive residues produced as a result of electric power generation or other reactor operation.

2. "Medical waste" means radioactive waste from all therapy, diagnosis, or research in medical fields and radioactive waste which results from the production and manufacture of radioactive material used for therapy, diagnosis, or research in medical fields, except that "medical waste" does not include spent fuel or waste from the fuel of an isotope production reactor.

3. "Radioactive waste generated or otherwise produced outside the geographic boundaries of the state of Washington" means radioactive waste which was located outside the state of Washington at the time of removal from a reactor vessel.

\[ 1981 c 1 § 2 (Initiative Measure No. 383, approved November 4, 1980); \]

## 70A.390.030 - Storage of radioactive waste from outside the state prohibited—Exceptions.
Notwithstanding any law, order, or regulation to the contrary, after July 1, 1981, no area within the geographic boundaries of the state of Washington may be used by any person or entity as a temporary, interim, or permanent storage site for radioactive waste, except medical waste, generated or otherwise produced outside the geographic boundaries of the state of Washington. This section does not apply to radioactive waste stored within the state of Washington prior to July 1, 1981.

\[ 1981 c 1 § 3 (Initiative Measure No. 383, approved November 4, 1980); \]

## 70A.390.040 - Transportation of radioactive waste from outside the state for storage within the state prohibited—Exception.
Notwithstanding any law, order, or regulation to the contrary, after July 1, 1981, no person or entity may transport radioactive waste, except medical waste, generated or otherwise produced outside the geographic boundaries of the state of Washington to any site within the geographic boundaries of the state of Washington for temporary, interim, or permanent storage.

\[ 1981 c 1 § 4 (Initiative Measure No. 383, approved November 4, 1980); \]

## 70A.390.050 - Violations—Penalties—Injunctions—Jurisdiction and venue—Fees and costs.
1. A violation of or failure to comply with the provisions of RCW 70A.390.030 or 70A.390.040 is a gross misdemeanor.

2. Any person or entity that violates or fails to comply with the provisions of RCW 70A.390.030 or 70A.390.040 is subject to a civil penalty of one thousand dollars for each violation or failure to comply.

3. Each day upon which a violation occurs constitutes a separate violation for the purposes of subsections (1) and (2) of this section.

4. Any person or entity violating this chapter may be enjoined from continuing the violation. The attorney general or any person residing in the state of Washington may bring an action to enjoin violations of this chapter, on his or her own behalf and on the behalf of all persons similarly situated. Such action may be maintained in the person's own name or in the name of the state of Washington. No bond may be required as a condition to obtaining any injunctive relief. The superior courts have jurisdiction over actions brought under this section, and venue shall lie in the county of the plaintiff's residence, in the county in which the violation is alleged to occur, or in Thurston county. In addition to other relief, the court in its discretion may award attorney's and expert witness fees and costs of the suit to a party who demonstrates that a violation of this chapter has occurred.

\[ [2020 c 20 § 1270](https://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/2019-20/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/House/2246-S.SL.pdf?cite=2020%20c%2020%20§%201270); 1981 c 1 § 5 (Initiative Measure No. 383, approved November 4, 1980); \]

## 70A.390.060 - Interstate compact for regional storage.
Notwithstanding the other provisions of this chapter, the state of Washington may enter into an interstate compact, which will become effective upon ratification by a majority of both houses of the United States Congress, to provide for the regional storage of radioactive wastes.

\[ 1981 c 1 § 6 (Initiative Measure No. 383, approved November 4, 1980); \]

## 70A.390.900 - Construction—1981 c 1.
This chapter shall be liberally construed to protect the health, safety, and welfare of the individual citizens of the state of Washington.

\[ 1981 c 1 § 7 (Initiative Measure No. 383, approved November 4, 1980); \]

## 70A.390.901 - Short title.
This act may be known as the Radioactive Waste Storage and Transportation Act of 1980.

\[ 1981 c 1 § 9 (Initiative Measure No. 383, approved November 4, 1980); \]

