# 2.68 - Judicial information system.
* [2.68.010 - Judicial information system committee—Fees.](#268010---judicial-information-system-committeefees)
* [2.68.020 - Judicial information system account.](#268020---judicial-information-system-account)
* [2.68.030 - Schedule of user fees.](#268030---schedule-of-user-fees)
* [2.68.040 - Judicial information system account—Increase in fines, penalties, assessments—Exception. (Effective until January 1, 2023.)](#268040---judicial-information-system-accountincrease-in-fines-penalties-assessmentsexception-effective-until-january-1-2023)
* [2.68.050 - Electronic access to judicial information.](#268050---electronic-access-to-judicial-information)
* [2.68.060 - Duties of the administrative office of the courts.](#268060---duties-of-the-administrative-office-of-the-courts)
## 2.68.010 - Judicial information system committee—Fees.
The judicial information system committee, as established by court rule, shall determine all matters pertaining to the delivery of services available from the judicial information system. The committee may establish a fee schedule for the provision of information services and may enter into contracts with any person, public or private, including the state, its departments, subdivisions, institutions, and agencies. However, no fee may be charged to county or city governmental agencies within the state of Washington using the judicial information system for the business of the courts.

\[ [1989 c 364 § 1](http://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1989c364.pdf?cite=1989%20c%20364%20§%201); \]

## 2.68.020 - Judicial information system account.
There is created an account in the custody of the state treasurer to be known as the judicial information system account. The administrative office of the courts shall maintain and administer the account, in which shall be deposited all moneys received from in-state noncourt users and any out-of-state users of the judicial information system and moneys as specified in RCW 2.68.040 for the purposes of providing judicial information system access to noncourt users and providing an adequate level of automated services to the judiciary. The legislature shall appropriate the funds in the account for the purposes of the judicial information system. The account shall be used for the acquisition of equipment, software, supplies, services, and other costs incidental to the acquisition, development, operation, and administration of information services, telecommunications, systems, software, supplies, and equipment, including the payment of principal and interest on items paid in installments. During the 2011-2013 fiscal biennium, the judicial information system account may be appropriated to support the state law library. During the 2013-2015 fiscal biennium, the judicial information system account may be appropriated to support the information systems and other activities in the administrative office of the courts.

\[ [2013 2nd sp.s. c 4 § 950](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/2013-14/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/Senate/5034-S.SL.pdf?cite=2013%202nd%20sp.s.%20c%204%20§%20950); [2012 2nd sp.s. c 7 § 913](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/2011-12/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/House/2127-S.SL.pdf?cite=2012%202nd%20sp.s.%20c%207%20§%20913); [2009 c 564 § 1802](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/2009-10/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/House/1244-S.SL.pdf?cite=2009%20c%20564%20§%201802); [2009 c 564 § 918](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/2009-10/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/House/1244-S.SL.pdf?cite=2009%20c%20564%20§%20918); [2005 c 282 § 11](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/2005-06/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/House/1668.SL.pdf?cite=2005%20c%20282%20§%2011); [1994 c 8 § 1](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/1993-94/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/Senate/6006-S.SL.pdf?cite=1994%20c%208%20§%201); [1989 c 364 § 2](http://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1989c364.pdf?cite=1989%20c%20364%20§%202); \]

## 2.68.030 - Schedule of user fees.
The judicial information system committee shall develop a schedule of user fees for in-state noncourt users and all out-of-state users of the judicial information computer system and charges for judicial information system products and licenses for the purpose of distributing and apportioning the full cost of operation and continued development of the system among the users. The schedule shall generate sufficient revenue to cover the costs relating to (1) the payment of salaries, wages, other costs including, but not limited to the acquisition, operation, and administration of acquired information services, supplies, and equipment; and (2) the development of judicial information system products and services. As used in this section, the term "supplies" shall not be interpreted to delegate or abrogate the state purchasing and material control director's responsibilities and authority to purchase supplies as provided in chapter 43.19 RCW.

\[ [1989 c 364 § 3](http://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1989c364.pdf?cite=1989%20c%20364%20§%203); \]

## 2.68.040 - Judicial information system account—Increase in fines, penalties, assessments—Exception. (Effective until January 1, 2023.)
1. To support the judicial information system account provided for in RCW 2.68.020, the supreme court may provide by rule for an increase in fines, penalties, and assessments, and the increased amount shall be forwarded to the state treasurer for deposit in the account:

   a. Pursuant to the authority of RCW 46.63.110(3), the sum of ten dollars to any penalty collected by a court pursuant to supreme court infraction rules for courts of limited jurisdiction;

   b. Pursuant to RCW 3.62.060, a mandatory appearance cost in the initial sum of ten dollars to be assessed on all defendants; and

   c. Pursuant to RCW 46.63.110(6), a ten-dollar assessment for each account for which a person requests a time payment schedule.

2. Notwithstanding a provision of law or rule to the contrary, the assessments provided for in this section may not be waived or suspended and shall be immediately due and payable upon forfeiture, conviction, deferral of prosecution, or request for time payment, as each shall occur.

3. The supreme court is requested to adjust these assessments for inflation.

4. This section does not apply to the additional monetary penalty under RCW 46.20.500.

5. This section does not apply to the additional monetary fine under RCW 46.61.110, 46.61.145, 46.61.180, 46.61.185, 46.61.190, and 46.61.205.

6. This section does not apply to the additional monetary penalties under RCW 46.61.165.

\[ [2019 c 467 § 6](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/2019-20/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/Senate/5695-S.SL.pdf?cite=2019%20c%20467%20§%206); [2019 c 403 § 12](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/2019-20/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/Senate/5723-S.SL.pdf?cite=2019%20c%20403%20§%2012); [2019 c 65 § 6](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/2019-20/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/House/1116-S.SL.pdf?cite=2019%20c%2065%20§%206); [1994 c 8 § 2](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/1993-94/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/Senate/6006-S.SL.pdf?cite=1994%20c%208%20§%202); \]

## 2.68.050 - Electronic access to judicial information.
The supreme court, the court of appeals and all superior and district courts, through the judicial information system committee, shall:

1. Continue to plan for and implement processes for making judicial information available electronically;

2. Promote and facilitate electronic access to the public of judicial information and services;

3. Establish technical standards for such services;

4. Consider electronic public access needs when planning new information systems or major upgrades of information systems;

5. Develop processes to determine which judicial information the public most wants and needs;

6. Increase capabilities to receive information electronically from the public and transmit forms, applications and other communications and transactions electronically;

7. Use technologies that allow continuous access twenty-four hours a day, seven days per week, involve little or no cost to access, and are capable of being used by persons without extensive technology ability; and

8. Consider and incorporate wherever possible ease of access to electronic technologies by persons with disabilities.

\[ [1996 c 171 § 3](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/1995-96/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/Senate/6556-S2.SL.pdf?cite=1996%20c%20171%20§%203); \]

## 2.68.060 - Duties of the administrative office of the courts.
The administrative office of the courts, under the direction of the judicial information system committee, shall:

1. Develop a judicial information system information technology portfolio consistent with the provisions of RCW 43.105.341;

2. Participate in the development of an enterprise-based statewide information technology strategy;

3. Ensure the judicial information system information technology portfolio is organized and structured to clearly indicate participation in and use of enterprise-wide information technology strategies;

4. As part of the biennial budget process, submit the judicial information system information technology portfolio to the chair and ranking member of the ways and means committees of the house of representatives and the senate, the office of financial management, and the consolidated technology services agency.

\[ [2015 3rd sp.s. c 1 § 403](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/2015-16/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/Senate/5315-S2.SL.pdf?cite=2015%203rd%20sp.s.%20c%201%20§%20403); [2015 c 225 § 4](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/2015-16/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/Senate/5024.SL.pdf?cite=2015%20c%20225%20§%204); [2010 c 282 § 7](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/2009-10/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/House/3178-S.SL.pdf?cite=2010%20c%20282%20§%207); \]

