# 2.76 - Interbranch advisory committee.
* [2.76.010 - Creation—Membership. (Expires January 1, 2026.)](#276010---creationmembership-expires-january-1-2026)
* [2.76.020 - Purposes. (Expires January 1, 2026.)](#276020---purposes-expires-january-1-2026)
* [2.76.800 - Recommendations to legislature. (Expires January 1, 2026.)](#276800---recommendations-to-legislature-expires-january-1-2026)
* [2.76.900 - Expiration date.](#276900---expiration-date)
## 2.76.010 - Creation—Membership. (Expires January 1, 2026.)
There is created an interbranch advisory committee consisting of the following members:

1. Two legislative members, one from each of the two largest caucuses of the house of representatives, appointed by the speaker of the house of representatives. One member shall be a member of a committee having jurisdiction over general civil or criminal law matters and the other member shall be a member of a committee having jurisdiction over the state operating budget;

2. Two legislative members, one from each of the two largest caucuses of the senate, appointed by the president of the senate. One member shall be a member of a committee having jurisdiction over general civil or criminal law matters and the other member shall be a member of a committee having jurisdiction over the state operating budget;

3. One person representing the governor's office, appointed by the governor;

4. One person representing the attorney general's office, appointed by the attorney general;

5. One person representing cities, appointed by the association of Washington cities;

6. One person who is an elected county councilmember representing counties, appointed by the Washington state association of counties;

7. One person representing court clerks, appointed by the Washington state association of county clerks;

8. Eight members from the judicial branch, appointed by the chief justice in consultation with the board of judicial administration, supreme court, court of appeals, superior court judges association, association of Washington superior court administrators, Washington association of juvenile court administrators, district and municipal court judges association, district and municipal court management association, administrative office of the courts, and access to justice board; and

9. One person representing the office of public defense and one person representing the office of civil legal aid, who shall serve as nonvoting members. Nonvoting members must be consulted by the interbranch advisory committee as needed.

\[ [2022 c 284 § 1](https://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/2021-22/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/Senate/5490-S.SL.pdf?cite=2022%20c%20284%20§%201); \]

## 2.76.020 - Purposes. (Expires January 1, 2026.)
The purpose of the interbranch advisory committee is to foster cooperation, communication, coordination, collaboration, and planning regarding issues of mutual concern among the three branches of state government. An additional purpose of the committee is to suggest ways to provide access to justice and to court services in a just and equitable manner.

\[ [2022 c 284 § 2](https://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/2021-22/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/Senate/5490-S.SL.pdf?cite=2022%20c%20284%20§%202); \]

## 2.76.800 - Recommendations to legislature. (Expires January 1, 2026.)
The interbranch advisory committee shall submit a recommendation to the legislative committees having jurisdiction over general civil or criminal law matters and having jurisdiction over the state operating budget by November 1, 2024, on whether the committee should be legislatively renewed or changed in any way.

\[ [2022 c 284 § 4](https://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/2021-22/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/Senate/5490-S.SL.pdf?cite=2022%20c%20284%20§%204); \]

## 2.76.900 - Expiration date.
This chapter expires January 1, 2026.

\[ [2022 c 284 § 5](https://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/2021-22/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/Senate/5490-S.SL.pdf?cite=2022%20c%20284%20§%205); \]

