# 28B.155 - Joint center for aerospace technology innovation.
* [28B.155.010 - Joint center for aerospace technology innovation.](#28b155010---joint-center-for-aerospace-technology-innovation)
* [28B.155.020 - Gifts, grants, donations.](#28b155020---gifts-grants-donations)
* [28B.155.030 - Industry partners—Freedom from discrimination.](#28b155030---industry-partnersfreedom-from-discrimination)
## 28B.155.010 - Joint center for aerospace technology innovation.
1. The joint center for aerospace technology innovation is created to:

    a.  Pursue joint industry-university research in computing, manufacturing efficiency, materials/structures innovation, and other new technologies that can be used in aerospace firms;

    b.  Enhance the education of students in the engineering departments of the University of Washington, Washington State University, and other participating institutions through industry-focused research; and

    c.  Work directly with existing small, medium-sized, and large aerospace firms and aerospace industry associations to identify research needs and opportunities to transfer off-the-shelf technologies that would benefit such firms.

2. The center shall be operated and administered as a multi-institutional education and research center, conducting research and development programs in various locations within Washington under the joint authority of the University of Washington and Washington State University. The initial administrative offices of the center shall be west of the crest of the Cascade mountains. In order to meet aerospace industry needs, the facilities and resources of the center must be made available to all four-year institutions of higher education as defined in RCW 28B.10.016. Resources include, but are not limited to, internships, on-the-job training, and research opportunities for undergraduate and graduate students and faculty.

3. The powers of the center are vested in and shall be exercised by a board of directors. The board shall consist of nine members appointed by the governor. The governor shall appoint a nonvoting chair. Of the eight voting members, one member shall represent small aerospace firms, one member shall represent medium-sized firms, one member shall represent large aerospace firms, one member shall represent labor, two members shall represent aerospace industry associations, and two members shall represent higher education. The terms of the initial members shall be staggered.

4. The board shall hire an executive director. The executive director shall hire such staff as the board deems necessary to operate the center. Staff support may be provided from among the cooperating institutions through cooperative agreements to the extent funds are available. The executive director may enter into cooperative agreements for programs and research with public and private organizations including state and nonstate agencies consistent with policies of the participating institutions.

5. The board must:

    a.  Work with aerospace industry associations and aerospace firms of all sizes to identify the research areas that will benefit the intermediate and long-term economic vitality of the Washington aerospace industry;

    b.  Identify entrepreneurial researchers to join or lead research teams in the research areas specified in (a) of this subsection and the steps the University of Washington and Washington State University will take to recruit such researchers;

    c.  Assist firms to integrate existing technologies into their operations and align the activities of the center with those of impact Washington to enhance services available to aerospace firms;

    d.  Develop internships, on-the-job training, research, and other opportunities and ensure that all undergraduate and graduate students enrolled in an aerospace engineering curriculum have direct experience with aerospace firms;

    e.  Assist researchers and firms in safeguarding intellectual property while advancing industry innovation;

    f.  Develop and strengthen university-industry relationships through promotion of faculty collaboration with industry, and sponsor at least one annual symposium focusing on aerospace research in the state of Washington;

    g.  Encourage a full range of projects from small research projects that meet the specific needs of a smaller company to large scale, multipartner projects;

    h.  Develop nonstate support of the center's research activities through leveraging dollars from federal and private for-profit and nonprofit sources;

    i.  Leverage its financial impact through joint support arrangements on a project-by-project basis as appropriate;

    j.  Establish mechanisms for soliciting and evaluating proposals and for making awards and reporting on technological progress, financial leverage, and other measures of impact;

    k.  By June 30, 2013, develop an operating plan that includes the specific processes, methods, or mechanisms the center will use to accomplish each of its duties as set out in this subsection; and

    l.  Report biennially to the legislature and the governor about the impact of the center's work on the state's economy and the aerospace sector, with projections of future impact, providing indicators of its impact, and outlining ideas for enhancing benefits to the state. The report must be coordinated with the governor's office , and the department of commerce.

\[ [2014 c 174 § 3](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/2013-14/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/Senate/6518-S2.SL.pdf?cite=2014%20c%20174%20§%203); [2014 c 112 § 102](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/2013-14/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/House/2029-S2.SL.pdf?cite=2014%20c%20112%20§%20102); [2012 c 242 § 1](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/2011-12/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/Senate/5982-S.SL.pdf?cite=2012%20c%20242%20§%201); \]

## 28B.155.020 - Gifts, grants, donations.
The joint center for aerospace technology innovation may solicit and receive gifts, grants, donations, sponsorships, or contributions from any federal, state, or local governmental agency or program or any private source, and expend the same for any purpose consistent with this chapter.

\[ [2012 c 242 § 2](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/2011-12/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/Senate/5982-S.SL.pdf?cite=2012%20c%20242%20§%202); \]

## 28B.155.030 - Industry partners—Freedom from discrimination.
When determining industry partners, the joint center for aerospace technology innovation shall ensure aerospace firms and aerospace industry associations adhere to the values of the state of Washington under RCW 49.60.030, which provide its citizens freedom from discrimination. Any relationship with a potential or current industry partner that is found to have violated RCW 49.60.030 by the attorney general shall not be considered and immediately terminated unless:

1. The industry partner has fulfilled the conditions or obligations associated with any court order or settlement resulting from that violation; or

2. The industry partner has taken significant and meaningful steps to correct the violation, as determined by the Washington state human rights commission.

\[ [2020 c 306 § 3](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/2019-20/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/Senate/6139-S2.SL.pdf?cite=2020%20c%20306%20§%203); \]

