# 28B.124 - State registered apprenticeship program opportunities.
* [28B.124.010 - Intent—Access to the Washington college grant.](#28b124010---intentaccess-to-the-washington-college-grant)
* [28B.124.020 - Credit towards a degree report. (Expires July 1, 2028.)](#28b124020---credit-towards-a-degree-report-expires-july-1-2028)
* [28B.124.030 - Credits for related supplemental instruction.](#28b124030---credits-for-related-supplemental-instruction)
## 28B.124.010 - Intent—Access to the Washington college grant.
1. It is the intent of the legislature to remove barriers for students enrolled in a state registered apprenticeship program under chapter 49.04 RCW to access the Washington college grant.

2. It is the goal of the legislature that students enrolled in state registered apprenticeship programs and receiving related supplemental instruction at a community and technical college have access to the Washington college grant through the financial aid office at their college. The Washington student achievement council shall verify access to the Washington college grant for students enrolled in state registered apprenticeship programs receiving their related supplemental instruction other than at a community and technical college.

3. The state board for community and technical colleges must fully implement this goal by the beginning of the 2025-26 academic year.

4. As part of the implementation process, the state board for community and technical colleges must collaborate with the office of student financial assistance, as defined in RCW 28B.92.030, to create a student information technology interface to simplify the application, verification of registration, eligibility, and award to students.

5. The state board for community and technical colleges and the office of student financial assistance must establish data-sharing agreements with other state agencies to verify student data.

\[ [2022 c 166 § 2](https://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/2021-22/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/Senate/5764-S2.SL.pdf?cite=2022%20c%20166%20§%202); \]

## 28B.124.020 - Credit towards a degree report. (Expires July 1, 2028.)
1. The student achievement council shall contract with the William D. Ruckelshaus center to do the following:

   a. Evaluate paths to credentials for apprentices, including recommendations on the requirements and benefits of expanding the multioccupational trades degree, and exploration of other credentials that will support transfer to baccalaureate degrees or other advanced credentials for apprentices. This evaluation may include options for instructional modality and analysis of the opportunities and limitations for incorporating general education course requirements into degree pathways for apprentices. The evaluation may also include reviewing credit articulation within the college system, prior learning assessments, and competency-based models, as applicable;

   b. Examine national best practices in delivery and award of educational credentials to apprentices. This exploration may include assessment of the governance structures and operational models for delivery of apprenticeship degree pathways, including operational considerations and costs associated with those models, and make recommendations on the model or models best suited for implementation in Washington with consideration on sustainably funding and growing state registered apprenticeships in the future;

   c. Research apprentices' demand for degrees, for individuals in, or who have completed, a state registered apprenticeship program;

   d. Review the current funding model for apprentices within the community and technical college system, with consideration on the use of state funds for apprenticeships, and national funding structures for apprenticeship programs that could be applied within Washington state. The center must consult with the Washington state apprenticeship council established under chapter 49.04 RCW, the state board for community and technical colleges, the associated general contractors of Washington, the association of Washington business, and any other relevant or impacted parties as needed to provide recommendations to the legislature on a sustainable funding model for related supplemental instruction and credit for apprentices through the community and technical college system to ensure it fully covers institutional and apprenticeship program costs of related supplemental instruction. This funding model review may include institutional costs of developing, administering, delivering, hosting, instructing, and contracting. These recommendations must be included in the annual report established in subsection (2) of this section;

   e. Consult with the state board for community and technical colleges, an organization representing the presidents of the public four-year institutions of higher education, the office of the superintendent of public instruction, the joint transfer council of Washington, the department of labor and industries, the Washington state labor council, the associated general contractors of Washington, the association of Washington business, the Washington building trades council, the student achievement council, the independent colleges of Washington, private career colleges, an accrediting body, career connect, and other stakeholders with interests and expertise in apprenticeship training and higher education mobility;

   f. Identify and remove barriers for apprentices to access the Washington college grant program, established under RCW 28B.92.200, and all other student services and support programs and resources.

2. The student achievement council shall report annually by December 1st, beginning in 2023, in compliance with RCW 43.01.036, the William D. Ruckelshaus Center's progress, findings, and recommendations to the appropriate higher education committees of the legislature on the evaluations in subsection (1) of this section. The annual report in 2026 shall provide viable policy options for degree pathways for individuals who complete state registered apprenticeship programs.

3. The apprenticeship council, in consultation with the state board for community and technical colleges, the student achievement council, an organization representing the presidents of the public four-year institutions of higher education, and any other relevant or impacted parties as needed, shall explore whether the state should establish an institution, or centralized program, for apprentices to receive related supplemental instruction for credit towards a degree. A report on their findings, with a recommendation, must be included in the December 1, 2023, annual report established in subsection (2) of this section.

4. This section expires July 1, 2028.

\[ [2022 c 166 § 3](https://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/2021-22/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/Senate/5764-S2.SL.pdf?cite=2022%20c%20166%20§%203); \]

## 28B.124.030 - Credits for related supplemental instruction.
All institutions of higher education, as defined in RCW 28B.10.016, must establish a policy for granting as many credits as possible and appropriate, for related supplemental instruction in active state apprenticeship programs, registered during or before July 1, 2022, by the 2028-29 school year. For all state registered apprenticeship programs approved after July 1, 2022, all institutions of higher education, as defined in RCW 28B.10.016, must establish a policy for granting as many credits, as possible and appropriate, for related supplemental instruction within six years of the program's registration. While establishing credits, institutions of higher education must consult with their faculty representatives. Credits are at the sole discretion of each institution of higher education and must be determined in consultation with their faculty representatives. Credits established by institutions of higher education are not intended to impact the possible revision of previously approved related supplemental instruction in a state registered apprenticeship program.

\[ [2022 c 166 § 4](https://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/2021-22/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/Senate/5764-S2.SL.pdf?cite=2022%20c%20166%20§%204); \]

