# 28B.90 - Foreign degree-granting branch campuses.
* [28B.90.005 - Findings.](#28b90005---findings)
* [28B.90.010 - Definitions.](#28b90010---definitions)
* [28B.90.020 - Approval of foreign degree-granting institution as branch campus.](#28b90020---approval-of-foreign-degree-granting-institution-as-branch-campus)
* [28B.90.030 - Branch campuses exempt under chapter  28B.85 RCW.](#28b90030---branch-campuses-exempt-under-chapter--28b85-rcw)
## 28B.90.005 - Findings.
The legislature finds that it has previously declared in *RCW 28B.107.005 that it is important to the economic future of the state to promote international awareness and understanding, and in RCW 1.20.100, that the state's economy and economic well-being depends heavily on foreign trade and international exchange.

The legislature finds that it is appropriate that such policies should be implemented by encouraging universities and colleges domiciled in foreign countries to establish branch campuses in Washington and that it is also important to those foreign colleges and universities that their status as authorized foreign degree-granting institutions be recognized by this state to facilitate the establishment and operation of such branch campuses.

In the furtherance of such policy, the legislature adopts the foreign degree-granting institution approved branch campus act.

\[ [1995 c 335 § 404](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/1995-96/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/Senate/5169-S.SL.pdf?cite=1995%20c%20335%20§%20404); [1993 c 181 § 1](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/1993-94/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/House/1497-S.SL.pdf?cite=1993%20c%20181%20§%201); \]

## 28B.90.010 - Definitions.
Unless the context clearly requires otherwise, the definitions in this section apply throughout this chapter.

1. "Approved branch campus" means a foreign degree-granting institution's branch campus that has been approved by the student achievement council to operate in the state.

2. "Branch campus" means an educational facility located in the state that:

    a. Is either owned and operated directly by a foreign degree-granting institution or indirectly through a Washington profit or nonprofit corporation in which the foreign degree-granting institution is the sole or controlling shareholder or member; and

    b. Provides courses solely and exclusively to students enrolled in a degree-granting program offered by the foreign degree-granting institution who:

        i. Have received academic credit for courses of study completed at the foreign degree-granting institution in its country of domicile;

        ii. Will receive academic credit towards their degree from the foreign degree-granting institution for the courses of study completed at the educational facility in the state; and

        iii. Will return to the foreign degree-granting institution in its country of domicile for completion of their degree-granting program or receipt of their degree.

3. "Council" means the student achievement council.

4. "Degree" means any designation, appellation, certificate, letters or words including, but not limited to, "associate," "bachelor," "masters," "doctorate," or "fellow" that signifies, or purports to signify, satisfactory and successful completion of requirements of a postsecondary academic program of study.

5. "Foreign degree-granting institution" means a public or private college or university, either profit or nonprofit:

    a. That is domiciled in a foreign country;

    b. That offers in its country of domicile credentials, instruction, or services prerequisite to the obtaining of an academic or professional degree granted by such college or university; and

    c. That is authorized under the laws or regulations of its country of domicile to operate a degree-granting institution in that country.

\[ [2012 c 229 § 554](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/2011-12/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/House/2483-S2.SL.pdf?cite=2012%20c%20229%20§%20554); [1993 c 181 § 2](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/1993-94/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/House/1497-S.SL.pdf?cite=1993%20c%20181%20§%202); \]

## 28B.90.020 - Approval of foreign degree-granting institution as branch campus.
A foreign degree-granting institution that submits evidence satisfactory to the council of its authorized status in its country of domicile and its intent to establish an educational facility in the state is entitled to operate a branch campus as defined in RCW 28B.90.010. Upon receipt of the satisfactory evidence, the council may certify that the branch campus of the foreign degree-granting institution is approved to operate in the state under this chapter, for as long as the foreign degree-granting institution retains its authorized status in its country of domicile.

\[ [2012 c 229 § 555](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/2011-12/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/House/2483-S2.SL.pdf?cite=2012%20c%20229%20§%20555); [1999 c 85 § 1](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/1999-00/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/Senate/5278.SL.pdf?cite=1999%20c%2085%20§%201); [1993 c 181 § 3](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/1993-94/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/House/1497-S.SL.pdf?cite=1993%20c%20181%20§%203); \]

## 28B.90.030 - Branch campuses exempt under chapter  28B.85 RCW.
A branch campus of a foreign degree-granting institution previously found by the council to be exempt from chapter 28B.85 RCW may continue to operate in the state. However, within one year of July 25, 1993, the institution shall provide evidence of authorization as required under RCW 28B.90.020. Upon receipt of the satisfactory evidence, the council shall certify that the branch campus of the foreign degree-granting institution is approved to operate in the state under this chapter.

\[ [2012 c 229 § 556](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/2011-12/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/House/2483-S2.SL.pdf?cite=2012%20c%20229%20§%20556); [1993 c 181 § 4](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/1993-94/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/House/1497-S.SL.pdf?cite=1993%20c%20181%20§%204); \]

