# 28B.135 - Child care for higher education students.
* [28B.135.010 - Four-year student child care in higher education account—Program established.](#28b135010---four-year-student-child-care-in-higher-education-accountprogram-established)
* [28B.135.020 - Grants—Eligibility—Grant period.](#28b135020---grantseligibilitygrant-period)
* [28B.135.030 - Program administration—Four-year institutions of higher education—Rules—Reports.](#28b135030---program-administrationfour-year-institutions-of-higher-educationrulesreports)
* [28B.135.035 - Program administration—Community and technical colleges—Rules—Reports.](#28b135035---program-administrationcommunity-and-technical-collegesrulesreports)
* [28B.135.040 - Four-year student child care in higher education account.](#28b135040---four-year-student-child-care-in-higher-education-account)
## 28B.135.010 - Four-year student child care in higher education account—Program established.
The four-year student child care in higher education account is established. The office of student financial assistance shall administer the program for the four-year institutions of higher education. Through this program the office shall award either competitive or matching child care grants to state institutions of higher education to encourage programs to address the need for high quality, accessible, and affordable child care for students at higher education institutions. The grants shall be used exclusively for the provision of quality child care services for students at institutions of higher education. The university or college administration and student government association, or its equivalent, of each institution receiving the award may contribute financial support in an amount equal to or greater than the child care grant received by the institution.

\[ [2011 1st sp.s. c 11 § 239](https://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/2011-12/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/Senate/5182-S2.SL.pdf?cite=2011%201st%20sp.s.%20c%2011%20§%20239); [2010 1st sp.s. c 9 § 5](https://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/2009-10/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/Senate/6572-S.SL.pdf?cite=2010%201st%20sp.s.%20c%209%20§%205); [2008 c 162 § 2](https://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/2007-08/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/House/2582-S.SL.pdf?cite=2008%20c%20162%20§%202); [1999 c 375 § 1](https://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/1999-00/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/Senate/5277-S.SL.pdf?cite=1999%20c%20375%20§%201); \]

## 28B.135.020 - Grants—Eligibility—Grant period.
The institution of higher education shall be eligible to receive the grant for a period not exceeding two years. After the expiration of any two-year grant, the institution may reapply to receive subsequent grant awards or a continuation of the grant awarded the prior two years.

\[ [1999 c 375 § 2](https://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/1999-00/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/Senate/5277-S.SL.pdf?cite=1999%20c%20375%20§%202); \]

## 28B.135.030 - Program administration—Four-year institutions of higher education—Rules—Reports.
The office of student financial assistance shall have the following powers and duties in administering the program for the four-year institutions of higher education:

1. To adopt rules necessary to carry out the program;

2. To establish one or more review committees to assist in the evaluation of proposals for funding. The review committees may receive input from parents, educators, and other experts in the field of early childhood education for this purpose;

3. To establish each biennium specific guidelines for submitting grant proposals consistent with the overall goals of the program. The guidelines shall be consistent with the following desired outcomes of increasing access to quality child care for students, providing affordable child care alternatives for students, creating a partnership between university or college administrations, university or college foundations, and student government associations, or their equivalents;

4. To proportionally distribute the amount of money available in the trust fund based on the financial support for child care received by the student government associations or their equivalents. Student government associations may solicit funds from private organizations and targeted fund-raising campaigns as part of their financial support for child care;

5. To solicit grant proposals and provide information to the institutions of higher education about the program; [and]

6. To establish reporting, evaluation, accountability, monitoring, and dissemination requirements for the recipients of the grants; and[.]

\[ [2011 1st sp.s. c 11 § 240](https://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/2011-12/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/Senate/5182-S2.SL.pdf?cite=2011%201st%20sp.s.%20c%2011%20§%20240); [2008 c 162 § 3](https://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/2007-08/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/House/2582-S.SL.pdf?cite=2008%20c%20162%20§%203); [2005 c 490 § 8](https://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/2005-06/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/House/1152-S2.SL.pdf?cite=2005%20c%20490%20§%208); [1999 c 375 § 3](https://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/1999-00/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/Senate/5277-S.SL.pdf?cite=1999%20c%20375%20§%203); \]

## 28B.135.035 - Program administration—Community and technical colleges—Rules—Reports.
The state board for community and technical colleges shall have the following powers and duties in administering the program established in RCW 28B.135.010 for the two-year institutions of higher education:

1. To adopt rules necessary to carry out the program;

2. To establish, if deemed necessary, one or more review committees to assist in the evaluation of proposals for funding. The review committees may receive input from parents, educators, and other experts in the field of early childhood education for this purpose;

3. To establish each biennium specific guidelines for submitting grant proposals consistent with the overall goals of the program. The guidelines shall be consistent with the following desired outcomes of increasing access to quality child care for students, providing affordable child care alternatives for students, creating more cooperative preschool programs or other alternative parent education models, creating models that can be replicated at other institutions, creating a partnership between college administrations, college foundations, and student government associations, or their equivalents, and increasing innovation at campus child care centers;

4. To establish guidelines for an allocation system based on factors that include but are not limited to: The amount of money available in the trust fund and the financial support for child care received by the student government associations or their equivalents. Student government associations may solicit funds from private organizations and targeted fund-raising campaigns as part of their financial support for child care;

5. To solicit grant proposals and provide information to the institutions of higher education about the program;

6. To establish reporting, evaluation, accountability, monitoring, and dissemination requirements for the recipients of the grants; and

7. To report to the appropriate committees of the legislature by December 15, 2008, and every two years thereafter, on the status of program design and implementation within the community and technical college system. The report shall include but not be limited to summary information on the institutions receiving child [care] grant allocations, the amount contributed by each college administration and student government association for the purposes of child care, including expenditures and reports for the previous biennium, services provided by each institutional child care center, the number of students using such services, and identifiable unmet need.

\[ [2008 c 162 § 4](https://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/2007-08/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/House/2582-S.SL.pdf?cite=2008%20c%20162%20§%204); \]

## 28B.135.040 - Four-year student child care in higher education account.
The four-year student child care in higher education account is established in the custody of the state treasurer. Moneys in the account may be spent only for the purposes of RCW 28B.135.010. Disbursements from the account shall be on the authorization of the office of student financial assistance. The account is subject to the allotment procedures under chapter 43.88 RCW, but no appropriation is required for disbursements.

\[ [2011 1st sp.s. c 11 § 241](https://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/2011-12/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/Senate/5182-S2.SL.pdf?cite=2011%201st%20sp.s.%20c%2011%20§%20241); [2010 1st sp.s. c 9 § 4](https://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/2009-10/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/Senate/6572-S.SL.pdf?cite=2010%201st%20sp.s.%20c%209%20§%204); [1999 c 375 § 4](https://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/1999-00/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/Senate/5277-S.SL.pdf?cite=1999%20c%20375%20§%204); \]

