# 9A.83 - Money laundering.
* [9A.83.010 - Definitions.](#9a83010---definitions)
* [9A.83.020 - Money laundering.](#9a83020---money-laundering)
* [9A.83.030 - Seizure and forfeiture.](#9a83030---seizure-and-forfeiture)
* [9A.83.040 - Release from liability.](#9a83040---release-from-liability)
## 9A.83.010 - Definitions.
The definitions set forth in this section apply throughout this chapter.

1. "Conducts a financial transaction" includes initiating, concluding, or participating in a financial transaction.

2. "Financial institution" means a bank, savings bank, credit union, or savings and loan institution.

3. "Financial transaction" means a purchase, sale, loan, pledge, gift, transfer, transmission, delivery, trade, deposit, withdrawal, payment, transfer between accounts, exchange of currency, extension of credit, or any other acquisition or disposition of property, by whatever means effected.

4. "Knows the property is proceeds of specified unlawful activity" means believing based upon the representation of a law enforcement officer or his or her agent, or knowing that the property is proceeds from some form, though not necessarily which form, of specified unlawful activity.

5. "Proceeds" means any interest in property directly or indirectly acquired through or derived from an act or omission, and any fruits of this interest, in whatever form.

6. "Property" means anything of value, whether real or personal, tangible or intangible.

7. "Specified unlawful activity" means an offense committed in this state that is a class A or B felony under Washington law or that is listed as "criminal profiteering" in RCW 9A.82.010, or an offense committed in any other state that is punishable under the laws of that state by more than one year in prison, or an offense that is punishable under federal law by more than one year in prison.

\[ [1999 c 143 § 41](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/1999-00/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/House/1142.SL.pdf?cite=1999%20c%20143%20§%2041); [1992 c 210 § 1](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/1991-92/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/Senate/5318-S2.SL.pdf?cite=1992%20c%20210%20§%201); \]

## 9A.83.020 - Money laundering.
1. A person is guilty of money laundering when that person conducts or attempts to conduct a financial transaction involving the proceeds of specified unlawful activity and:

   a. Knows the property is proceeds of specified unlawful activity; or

   b. Knows that the transaction is designed in whole or in part to conceal or disguise the nature, location, source, ownership, or control of the proceeds, and acts recklessly as to whether the property is proceeds of specified unlawful activity; or 

   c. Knows that the transaction is designed in whole or in part to avoid a transaction reporting requirement under federal law.

2. In consideration of the constitutional right to counsel afforded by the Fifth and Sixth amendments to the United States Constitution and Article 1, Section 22 of the Constitution of Washington, an additional proof requirement is imposed when a case involves a licensed attorney who accepts a fee for representing a client in an actual criminal investigation or proceeding. In these situations, the prosecution is required to prove that the attorney accepted proceeds of specified unlawful activity with intent:

   a. To conceal or disguise the nature, location, source, ownership, or control of the proceeds, knowing the property is proceeds of specified unlawful activity; or

   b. To avoid a transaction reporting requirement under federal law.

The proof required by this subsection is in addition to the requirements contained in subsection (1) of this section.

3. An additional proof requirement is imposed when a case involves a financial institution and one or more of its employees. In these situations, the prosecution is required to prove that proceeds of specified unlawful activity were accepted with intent:

   a. To conceal or disguised [disguise] the nature, location, source, ownership, or control of the proceeds, knowing the property is proceeds of specified unlawful activity; or

   b. To avoid a transaction reporting requirement under federal law.

The proof required by this subsection is in addition to the requirements contained in subsection (1) of this section.

4. Money laundering is a class B felony.

5. A person who violates this section is also liable for a civil penalty of twice the value of the proceeds involved in the financial transaction and for the costs of the suit, including reasonable investigative and attorneys' fees.

6. Proceedings under this chapter shall be in addition to any other criminal penalties, civil penalties, or forfeitures authorized under state law.

\[ [1992 c 210 § 2](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/1991-92/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/Senate/5318-S2.SL.pdf?cite=1992%20c%20210%20§%202); \]

## 9A.83.030 - Seizure and forfeiture.
1. Proceeds traceable to or derived from specified unlawful activity or a violation of RCW 9A.83.020 are subject to seizure and forfeiture. The attorney general or county prosecuting attorney may file a civil action for the forfeiture of proceeds. Unless otherwise provided for under this section, no property rights exist in these proceeds. All right, title, and interest in the proceeds shall vest in the governmental entity of which the seizing law enforcement agency is a part upon commission of the act or omission giving rise to forfeiture under this section.

2. Real or personal property subject to forfeiture under this chapter may be seized by any law enforcement officer of this state upon process issued by a superior court that has jurisdiction over the property. Any agency seizing real property shall file a lis pendens concerning the property. Real property seized under this section shall not be transferred or otherwise conveyed until ninety days after seizure or until a judgment of forfeiture is entered, whichever is later. Real property seized under this section may be transferred or conveyed to any person or entity who acquires title by foreclosure or deed in lieu of foreclosure of a security interest. Seizure of personal property without process may be made if:

   a. The seizure is incident to an arrest or a search under a search warrant or an inspection under an administrative inspection warrant issued pursuant to RCW 69.50.502; or

   b. The property subject to seizure has been the subject of a prior judgment in favor of the state in a criminal injunction or forfeiture proceeding based upon this chapter.

3. A seizure under subsection (2) of this section commences proceedings for forfeiture. The law enforcement agency under whose authority the seizure was made shall cause notice of the seizure and intended forfeiture of the seized proceeds to be served within fifteen days after the seizure on the owner of the property seized and the person in charge thereof and any person who has a known right or interest therein, including a community property interest. Service of notice of seizure of real property shall be made according to the rules of civil procedure. However, the state may not obtain a default judgment with respect to real property against a party who is served by substituted service absent an affidavit stating that a good faith effort has been made to ascertain if the defaulted party is incarcerated within the state, and that there is no present basis to believe that the party is incarcerated within the state. The notice of seizure in other cases may be served by any method authorized by law or court rule including but not limited to service by certified mail with return receipt requested. Service by mail is complete upon mailing within the fifteen-day period after the seizure.

4. If no person notifies the seizing law enforcement agency in writing of the person's claim of ownership or right to possession of the property within forty-five days of the seizure in the case of personal property and ninety days in the case of real property, the property seized shall be deemed forfeited. The community property interest in real property of a person whose spouse or domestic partner committed a violation giving rise to seizure of the real property may not be forfeited if the person did not participate in the violation.

5. If a person notifies the seizing law enforcement agency in writing of the person's claim of ownership or right to possession of property within forty-five days of the seizure in the case of personal property and ninety days in the case of real property, the person or persons shall be afforded a reasonable opportunity to be heard as to the claim or right. The provisions of RCW 69.50.505(5) shall apply to any such hearing. The seizing law enforcement agency shall promptly return property to the claimant upon the direction of the administrative law judge or court.

6. Disposition of forfeited property shall be made in the manner provided for in RCW 69.50.505 (8) through (10) and (14) or 9.46.231 (6) through (8) and (10).

\[ [2020 c 62 § 1](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/2019-20/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/Senate/6119.SL.pdf?cite=2020%20c%2062%20§%201); [2008 c 6 § 630](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/2007-08/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/House/3104-S2.SL.pdf?cite=2008%20c%206%20§%20630); [2001 c 168 § 2](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/2001-02/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/House/1995-S.SL.pdf?cite=2001%20c%20168%20§%202); [1992 c 210 § 3](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/1991-92/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/Senate/5318-S2.SL.pdf?cite=1992%20c%20210%20§%203); \]

## 9A.83.040 - Release from liability.
No liability is imposed by this chapter upon any authorized state, county, or municipal officer engaged in the lawful performance of his or her duties, or upon any person who reasonably believes that he or she is acting at the direction of such officer and that the officer is acting in the lawful performance of his or her duties.

\[ [2011 c 336 § 409](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/2011-12/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/Senate/5045.SL.pdf?cite=2011%20c%20336%20§%20409); [1992 c 210 § 4](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/1991-92/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/Senate/5318-S2.SL.pdf?cite=1992%20c%20210%20§%204); \]

