# 9.24 - Corporations, crimes relating to.
* [9.24.010 - Fraud in stock subscription.](#924010---fraud-in-stock-subscription)
* [9.24.020 - Fraudulent issue of stock, scrip, etc.](#924020---fraudulent-issue-of-stock-scrip-etc)
* [9.24.030 - Insolvent bank receiving deposit.](#924030---insolvent-bank-receiving-deposit)
* [9.24.040 - Corporation doing business without license.](#924040---corporation-doing-business-without-license)
* [9.24.050 - False report of corporation.](#924050---false-report-of-corporation)
## 9.24.010 - Fraud in stock subscription.
Every person who shall sign the name of a fictitious person to any subscription for or any agreement to take stock in any corporation existing or proposed, and every person who shall sign to any such subscription or agreement the name of any person, knowing that such person does not intend in good faith to comply with the terms thereof, or upon any understanding or agreement that the terms of such subscription or agreement are not to be complied with or enforced, shall be guilty of a gross misdemeanor.

\[ [1909 c 249 § 386](http://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1909c249.pdf?cite=1909%20c%20249%20§%20386); RRS § 2638; \]

## 9.24.020 - Fraudulent issue of stock, scrip, etc.
Every officer, agent or other person in the service of a joint stock company or corporation, domestic or foreign, who, willfully and knowingly with intent to defraud:

1. Sells, pledges, or issues, or causes to be sold, pledged, or issued, or signs or executes, or causes to be signed or executed, with intent to sell, pledge, or issue, or cause to be sold, pledged, or issued, any certificate or instrument purporting to be a certificate or evidence of ownership of any share or shares of such company or corporation, or any conveyance or encumbrance of real or personal property, contract, bond, or evidence of debt, or writing purporting to be a conveyance or encumbrance of real or personal property, contract, bond or evidence of debt of such company or corporation, without being first duly authorized by such company or corporation, or contrary to the charter or laws under which such company or corporation exists, or in excess of the power of such company or corporation, or of the limit imposed by law or otherwise upon its power to create or issue stock or evidence of debt; or,

2. Reissues, sells, pledges, disposes of, or causes to be reissued, sold, pledged, or disposed of, any surrendered or canceled certificate or other evidence of the transfer of ownership of any such share or shares

is guilty of a class B felony and shall be punished by imprisonment in a state correctional facility for not more than ten years, or by a fine of not more than five thousand dollars, or by both.

\[ [2003 c 53 § 17](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/2003-04/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/Senate/5758.SL.pdf?cite=2003%20c%2053%20§%2017); [1992 c 7 § 5](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/1991-92/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/House/2263-S.SL.pdf?cite=1992%20c%207%20§%205); [1909 c 249 § 387](http://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1909c249.pdf?cite=1909%20c%20249%20§%20387); RRS § 2639; \]

## 9.24.030 - Insolvent bank receiving deposit.
Every owner, officer, stockholder, agent or employee of any person, firm, corporation or association engaged, wholly or in part, in the business of banking or receiving money or negotiable paper or securities on deposit or in trust, who shall accept or receive, with or without interest, any deposit, or who shall consent thereto or connive thereat, when he or she knows or has good reason to believe that such person, firm, corporation or association is unsafe or insolvent, is guilty of a class B felony and shall be punished by imprisonment in a state correctional facility for not more than ten years, or by a fine of not more than ten thousand dollars.

\[ [2003 c 53 § 18](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/2003-04/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/Senate/5758.SL.pdf?cite=2003%20c%2053%20§%2018); [1992 c 7 § 6](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/1991-92/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/House/2263-S.SL.pdf?cite=1992%20c%207%20§%206); [1909 c 249 § 388](http://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1909c249.pdf?cite=1909%20c%20249%20§%20388); [1893 c 111 § 1](http://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1893c111.pdf?cite=1893%20c%20111%20§%201); RRS § 2640; \]

## 9.24.040 - Corporation doing business without license.
Every corporation, whether domestic or foreign, and every person representing or pretending to represent such corporation as an officer, agent or employee thereof, who shall transact, solicit or advertise for any business in this state, before such corporation shall have obtained from the officer lawfully authorized to issue the same, a certificate that such corporation is authorized to transact business in this state, shall be guilty of a gross misdemeanor.

\[ [1909 c 249 § 389](http://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1909c249.pdf?cite=1909%20c%20249%20§%20389); RRS § 2641; \]

## 9.24.050 - False report of corporation.
Every director, officer or agent of any corporation or joint stock association, and every person engaged in organizing or promoting any enterprise, who shall knowingly make or publish or concur in making or publishing any written prospectus, report, exhibit or statement of its affairs or pecuniary condition, containing any material statement that is false or exaggerated, is guilty of a class B felony and shall be punished by imprisonment in a state correctional facility for not more than ten years, or by a fine of not more than five thousand dollars.

\[ [2003 c 53 § 19](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/2003-04/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/Senate/5758.SL.pdf?cite=2003%20c%2053%20§%2019); [1992 c 7 § 7](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/1991-92/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/House/2263-S.SL.pdf?cite=1992%20c%207%20§%207); [1909 c 249 § 390](http://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1909c249.pdf?cite=1909%20c%20249%20§%20390); RRS § 2642; \]

