# 9.69 - Duty of witnesses.
* [9.69.100 - Duty of witness of offense against child or any violent offense—Penalty.](#969100---duty-of-witness-of-offense-against-child-or-any-violent-offensepenalty)
## 9.69.100 - Duty of witness of offense against child or any violent offense—Penalty.
1. A person who witnesses the actual commission of:

   a. A violent offense as defined in RCW 9.94A.030 or preparations for the commission of such an offense;

   b. A sexual offense against a child or an attempt to commit such a sexual offense; or

   c. An assault of a child that appears reasonably likely to cause substantial bodily harm to the child,

shall as soon as reasonably possible notify the prosecuting attorney, law enforcement, medical assistance, or other public officials.

2. This section shall not be construed to affect privileged relationships as provided by law.

3. The duty to notify a person or agency under this section is met if a person notifies or attempts to provide such notice by telephone or any other means as soon as reasonably possible.

4. Failure to report as required by subsection (1) of this section is a gross misdemeanor. However, a person is not required to report under this section where that person has a reasonable belief that making such a report would place that person or another family or household member in danger of immediate physical harm.

\[ [1987 c 503 § 18](https://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1987c503.pdf?cite=1987%20c%20503%20§%2018); [1985 c 443 § 21](https://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1985c443.pdf?cite=1985%20c%20443%20§%2021); [1970 ex.s. c 49 § 8](https://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1970ex1c49.pdf?cite=1970%20ex.s.%20c%2049%20§%208); \]

