# 9.101 - Criminal street gang definitions—State preemption.
* [9.101.010 - Criminal street gang definitions—State preemption.](#9101010---criminal-street-gang-definitionsstate-preemption)
## 9.101.010 - Criminal street gang definitions—State preemption.
1. The state of Washington hereby fully occupies and preempts the entire field of definitions used for purposes of substantive criminal law relating to criminal street gangs, criminal street gang-related offenses, criminal street gang associates and members, and pattern of criminal street gang activity. These definitions of "criminal street gang," "criminal street gang associate or member," "criminal street gang-related offense," and "pattern of criminal street gang activity" contained in RCW 9.94A.030 expressly preempt any conflicting city or county codes or ordinances. Cities, towns, counties, or other municipalities may enact laws and ordinances relating to criminal street gangs that contain definitions that are consistent with definitions pursuant to RCW 9.94A.030. Local laws and ordinances that are inconsistent with the definitions shall not be enacted and are preempted and repealed, regardless of the nature of the code, charter, or home rule status of such city, town, county, or municipality.

2. The preemption provided in this chapter does not apply to "gang" as defined in RCW 28A.600.455 under the common school provisions act or "gang" as defined in RCW 59.18.030 under the landlord-tenant act.

3. The preemption provided for in this chapter does not restrict the adoption or use of a uniform state definition of "gang," "gang member," or "gang associate," for purposes of the creation and maintenance of the statewide gang database for law enforcement intelligence purposes under RCW 43.43.762.

\[ [2008 c 276 § 401](https://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/2007-08/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/House/2712-S2.SL.pdf?cite=2008%20c%20276%20§%20401); \]

