# 82.14A - Cities and towns—License fees and taxes on financial institutions.
* [82.14A.010 - License fees or taxes on financial institutions—Restrictions—Application of chapter  82.04 RCW—Rates.](#8214a010---license-fees-or-taxes-on-financial-institutionsrestrictionsapplication-of-chapter--8204-rcwrates)
* [82.14A.020 - Division of gross income of business between cities, towns and unincorporated areas.](#8214a020---division-of-gross-income-of-business-between-cities-towns-and-unincorporated-areas)
* [82.14A.030 - Effective date of resolutions or ordinances.](#8214a030---effective-date-of-resolutions-or-ordinances)
* [82.14A.900 - Effective date—1972 ex.s. c 134.](#8214a900---effective-date1972-exs-c-134)
## 82.14A.010 - License fees or taxes on financial institutions—Restrictions—Application of chapter  82.04 RCW—Rates.
The governing body of any city or town which imposes a license fee or tax, by ordinance or resolution, may pursuant to RCW 82.14A.010 through 82.14A.030 only, fix and impose a license fee or tax on national banks, state banks, trust companies, mutual savings banks, building and loan associations, savings and loan associations, and other financial institutions for the act or privilege of engaging in business: PROVIDED, That the definitions, deductions and exemptions set forth in chapter 82.04 RCW, insofar as they shall be applicable shall be applied to a license fee or tax imposed by any city or town, if such fee or tax is measured by the gross income of the business: PROVIDED, FURTHER, That the rate of such license fee or tax shall not exceed the rate imposed upon other service type business activity: AND PROVIDED FURTHER, That nothing in RCW 82.14A.010 through 82.14A.030 shall extend the regulatory power of any city or town.

\[ [1972 ex.s. c 134 § 2](https://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1972ex1c134.pdf?cite=1972%20ex.s.%20c%20134%20§%202); \]

## 82.14A.020 - Division of gross income of business between cities, towns and unincorporated areas.
For purposes of RCW 82.14A.010, the state department of revenue is hereby authorized and directed to promulgate, pursuant to the provisions of chapter 34.05 RCW, rules establishing uniform methods of division of gross income of the business of a single taxpayer between those cities, towns and unincorporated areas in which such taxpayer has a place of business.

\[ [1972 ex.s. c 134 § 3](https://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1972ex1c134.pdf?cite=1972%20ex.s.%20c%20134%20§%203); \]

## 82.14A.030 - Effective date of resolutions or ordinances.
No resolution or ordinance or any amendment thereto adopted pursuant to RCW 82.14A.010 shall be effective, except on the first day of a calendar month.

\[ [1972 ex.s. c 134 § 5](https://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1972ex1c134.pdf?cite=1972%20ex.s.%20c%20134%20§%205); \]

## 82.14A.900 - Effective date—1972 ex.s. c 134.
Sections 2 through 5 of this 1972 amendatory act shall take effect July 1, 1972.

\[ [1972 ex.s. c 134 § 8](https://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1972ex1c134.pdf?cite=1972%20ex.s.%20c%20134%20§%208); \]

