# 82.14B - Counties—Tax on telephone access line use.
* [82.14B.010 - Findings.](#8214b010---findings)
* [82.14B.020 - Definitions.](#8214b020---definitions)
* [82.14B.030 - County enhanced 911 excise tax on use of switched access lines and radio access lines authorized—Amount—State enhanced 911 excise tax—Amount.](#8214b030---county-enhanced-911-excise-tax-on-use-of-switched-access-lines-and-radio-access-lines-authorizedamountstate-enhanced-911-excise-taxamount)
* [82.14B.035 - Tax preferences—Expiration dates.](#8214b035---tax-preferencesexpiration-dates)
* [82.14B.040 - Collection of tax.](#8214b040---collection-of-tax)
* [82.14B.042 - Payment and collection of taxes—Penalties for violations.](#8214b042---payment-and-collection-of-taxespenalties-for-violations)
* [82.14B.050 - Use of proceeds.](#8214b050---use-of-proceeds)
* [82.14B.055 - Use of funds voluntarily remitted.](#8214b055---use-of-funds-voluntarily-remitted)
* [82.14B.060 - County imposition of tax—Ordinance—Department notice.](#8214b060---county-imposition-of-taxordinancedepartment-notice)
* [82.14B.061 - Administration by department—Extending reporting periods.](#8214b061---administration-by-departmentextending-reporting-periods)
* [82.14B.063 - Administration and collection by department—County enhanced 911 excise tax account created.](#8214b063---administration-and-collection-by-departmentcounty-enhanced-911-excise-tax-account-created)
* [82.14B.065 - County enhanced 911 excise tax account distributions—Enhanced 911 excise tax imposed in excess of maximum allowable.](#8214b065---county-enhanced-911-excise-tax-account-distributionsenhanced-911-excise-tax-imposed-in-excess-of-maximum-allowable)
* [82.14B.150 - Filing of tax returns—Credit or refund for bad debts.](#8214b150---filing-of-tax-returnscredit-or-refund-for-bad-debts)
* [82.14B.160 - Exemption—Activities immune from taxation under constitutions.](#8214b160---exemptionactivities-immune-from-taxation-under-constitutions)
* [82.14B.200 - Burden of proof that sale is not to subscriber—Effect of resale certificate—Liability if no retail certificate—Penalties—Exceptions.](#8214b200---burden-of-proof-that-sale-is-not-to-subscribereffect-of-resale-certificateliability-if-no-retail-certificatepenaltiesexceptions)
* [82.14B.210 - Personal liability upon termination, dissolution, or abandonment of business—Exemptions—Notice—Applicability—Collections.](#8214b210---personal-liability-upon-termination-dissolution-or-abandonment-of-businessexemptionsnoticeapplicabilitycollections)
## 82.14B.010 - Findings.
The legislature finds that the state and counties should be provided with an additional revenue source to fund enhanced 911 emergency communications systems throughout the state on a multicounty or countywide basis. The legislature further finds that the most efficient and appropriate method of deriving additional revenue for this purpose is to impose an excise tax on the use of switched access lines, radio access lines, and interconnected voice over internet protocol service lines.

\[ [2010 1st sp.s. c 19 § 1](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/2009-10/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/Senate/6846-S.SL.pdf?cite=2010%201st%20sp.s.%20c%2019%20§%201); [1991 c 54 § 9](?cite=1991%20c%2054%20§%209); [1981 c 160 § 1](http://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1981c160.pdf?cite=1981%20c%20160%20§%201); \]

## 82.14B.020 - Definitions.
As used in this chapter:

1. "Consumer" means a person who purchases a prepaid wireless telecommunications service in a retail transaction.

2. "Emergency services communication system" means a multicounty or countywide communications network, including an enhanced 911 emergency communications system, which provides rapid public access for coordinated dispatching of services, personnel, equipment, and facilities for police, fire, medical, or other emergency services.

3. "Enhanced 911 emergency communications system" means a public communications system consisting of a network, database, and on-premises equipment that is accessed by dialing or accessing 911 and that enables reporting police, fire, medical, or other emergency situations to a public safety answering point. The system includes the capability to selectively route incoming 911 voice or data to the appropriate public safety answering point that operates in a defined 911 service area and the capability to automatically display the name, address, and telephone number of incoming 911 voice or data at the appropriate public safety answering point. "Enhanced 911 emergency communications system" includes the modernization to next generation 911 systems.

4. "Interconnected voice over internet protocol service" has the same meaning as provided by the federal communications commission in 47 C.F.R. Sec. 9.3 on January 1, 2009, or a subsequent date determined by the department.

5. "Interconnected voice over internet protocol service line" means an interconnected voice over internet protocol service that offers an active telephone number or successor dialing protocol assigned by a voice over internet protocol provider to a voice over internet protocol service customer that has inbound and outbound calling capability, which can directly access a public safety answering point when such a voice over internet protocol service customer has a place of primary use in the state.

6. "Local exchange company" has the meaning ascribed to it in RCW 80.04.010.

7. "Place of primary use" means the street address representative of where the subscriber's use of the radio access line or interconnected voice over internet protocol service line occurs, which must be:

   a. The residential street address or primary business street address of the subscriber; and

   b. In the case of radio access lines, within the licensed service area of the home service provider.

8. "Prepaid wireless telecommunications service" means a telecommunications service that provides the right to use mobile wireless service as well as other nontelecommunications services including the download of digital products delivered electronically, content, and ancillary services, which must be paid for in full in advance and sold in predetermined units or dollars of which the number declines with use in a known amount.

9. "Private telecommunications system" has the meaning ascribed to it in RCW 80.04.010.

10. "Radio access line" means the telephone number assigned to or used by a subscriber for two-way local wireless voice service available to the public for hire from a radio communications service company. Radio access lines include, but are not limited to, radio-telephone communications lines used in cellular telephone service, personal communications services, and network radio access lines, or their functional and competitive equivalent. Radio access lines do not include lines that provide access to one-way signaling service, such as paging service, or to communications channels suitable only for data transmission, or to nonlocal radio access line service, such as wireless roaming service, or to a private telecommunications system.

11. "Radio communications service company" has the meaning ascribed to it in RCW 80.04.010, except that it does not include radio paging providers. It does include those persons or entities that provide commercial mobile radio services, as defined by 47 U.S.C. Sec. 332(d)(1), and both facilities-based and nonfacilities-based resellers.

12. "Retail transaction" means the purchase of prepaid wireless telecommunications service from a seller for any purpose other than resale.

13. "Seller" means a person who sells prepaid wireless telecommunications service to another person.

14. "Subscriber" means the retail purchaser of telecommunications service, a competitive telephone service, or interconnected voice over internet protocol service. "Subscriber" does not include a consumer, as defined in this section.

15. "Switched access line" means the telephone service line which connects a subscriber's main telephone(s) or equivalent main telephone(s) to the local exchange company's switching office.

\[ [2013 2nd sp.s. c 8 § 102](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/2013-14/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/House/1971-S2.SL.pdf?cite=2013%202nd%20sp.s.%20c%208%20§%20102); [2010 1st sp.s. c 19 § 2](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/2009-10/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/Senate/6846-S.SL.pdf?cite=2010%201st%20sp.s.%20c%2019%20§%202); prior:  2007 c 54 § 16; [2007 c 6 § 1009](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/2007-08/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/Senate/5089-S.SL.pdf?cite=2007%20c%206%20§%201009); [2002 c 341 § 7](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/2001-02/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/House/2595.SL.pdf?cite=2002%20c%20341%20§%207); [1998 c 304 § 2](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/1997-98/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/House/1126-S.SL.pdf?cite=1998%20c%20304%20§%202); [1994 c 96 § 2](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/1993-94/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/House/2601.SL.pdf?cite=1994%20c%2096%20§%202); [1991 c 54 § 10](?cite=1991%20c%2054%20§%2010); [1981 c 160 § 2](http://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1981c160.pdf?cite=1981%20c%20160%20§%202); \]

## 82.14B.030 - County enhanced 911 excise tax on use of switched access lines and radio access lines authorized—Amount—State enhanced 911 excise tax—Amount.
Subject to the enactment into law of the 2013 amendments to RCW 82.08.0289 in section 107, chapter 8, Laws of 2013 2nd sp. sess., the 2013 amendments to RCW 80.36.430 in section 108, chapter 8, Laws of 2013 2nd sp. sess., and the 2013 amendments to RCW 43.20A.725 in section 109, chapter 8, Laws of 2013 2nd sp. sess.:

1. The legislative authority of a county may impose a county enhanced 911 excise tax on the use of switched access lines in an amount not exceeding seventy cents per month for each switched access line. The amount of tax must be uniform for each switched access line. Each county must provide notice of the tax to all local exchange companies serving in the county at least sixty days in advance of the date on which the first payment is due. The tax imposed under this subsection must be remitted to the department by local exchange companies on a tax return provided by the department. The tax must be deposited in the county enhanced 911 excise tax account as provided in RCW 82.14B.063.

2. [Empty]

   a. The legislative authority of a county may also impose a county enhanced 911 excise tax on the use of radio access lines:

      i. By subscribers whose place of primary use is located within the county in an amount not exceeding seventy cents per month for each radio access line. The amount of tax must be uniform for each radio access line under this subsection (2)(a)(i); and

      ii. By consumers whose retail transaction occurs within the county in an amount not exceeding seventy cents per retail transaction. The amount of tax must be uniform for each retail transaction under this subsection (2)(a)(ii).

   b. The county must provide notice of the tax to all radio communications service companies serving in the county at least sixty days in advance of the date on which the first payment is due. The tax imposed under this section must be remitted to the department by radio communications service companies, including those companies that resell radio access lines, and sellers of prepaid wireless telecommunications services, on a tax return provided by the department. The tax must be deposited in the county enhanced 911 excise tax account as provided in RCW 82.14B.063.

3. [Empty]

   a. The legislative authority of a county may impose a county enhanced 911 excise tax on the use of interconnected voice over internet protocol service lines in an amount not exceeding seventy cents per month for each interconnected voice over internet protocol service line. The amount of tax must be uniform for each line and must be levied on no more than the number of voice over internet protocol service lines on an account that are capable of simultaneous unrestricted outward calling to the public switched telephone network.

   b. The interconnected voice over internet protocol service company must use the place of primary use of the subscriber to determine which county's enhanced 911 excise tax applies to the service provided to the subscriber.

   c. The tax imposed under this section must be remitted to the department by interconnected voice over internet protocol service companies on a tax return provided by the department.

   d. The tax must be deposited in the county enhanced 911 excise tax account as provided in RCW 82.14B.063.

   e. To the extent that a local exchange carrier and an interconnected voice over internet protocol service company contractually jointly provide a single service line, only one service company is responsible for remitting the enhanced 911 excise taxes, and nothing in this section precludes service companies who jointly provide service from agreeing by contract which of them must remit the taxes collected.

4. Counties imposing a county enhanced 911 excise tax must provide an annual update to the enhanced 911 coordinator detailing the proportion of their county enhanced 911 excise tax that is being spent on:

   a. Efforts to modernize their existing enhanced 911 communications system; and

   b. Enhanced 911 operational costs.

5. A state enhanced 911 excise tax is imposed on all switched access lines in the state. The amount of tax may not exceed twenty-five cents per month for each switched access line. The tax must be uniform for each switched access line. The tax imposed under this subsection must be remitted to the department by local exchange companies on a tax return provided by the department. Tax proceeds must be deposited by the treasurer in the enhanced 911 account created in RCW 38.52.540.

6. [Empty]

   a. A state enhanced 911 excise tax is imposed on the use of all radio access lines:

      i. By subscribers whose place of primary use is located within the state in an amount of twenty-five cents per month for each radio access line. The tax must be uniform for each radio access line under this subsection (6)(a)(i); and

      ii. By consumers whose retail transaction occurs within the state in an amount of twenty-five cents per retail transaction. The tax must be uniform for each retail transaction under this subsection (6)(a)(ii). Until July 1, 2018, a seller of prepaid wireless telecommunications service may charge an additional five cents per retail transaction as compensation for the cost of collecting and remitting the tax. 

   b. The tax imposed under this section must be remitted to the department by radio communications service companies, including those companies that resell radio access lines, and sellers of prepaid wireless telecommunications service, on a tax return provided by the department. Tax proceeds must be deposited by the treasurer in the enhanced 911 account created in RCW 38.52.540. The tax imposed under this section is not subject to the state sales and use tax or any local tax.

7. For purposes of the state and county enhanced 911 excise taxes imposed by subsections (2) and (6) of this section, the retail transaction is deemed to occur at the location where the transaction is sourced to under RCW 82.32.520(3)(c).

8. A state enhanced 911 excise tax is imposed on all interconnected voice over internet protocol service lines in the state. The amount of tax may not exceed twenty-five cents per month for each interconnected voice over internet protocol service line whose place of primary use is located in the state. The amount of tax must be uniform for each line and must be levied on no more than the number of voice over internet protocol service lines on an account that are capable of simultaneous unrestricted outward calling to the public switched telephone network. The tax imposed under this subsection must be remitted to the department by interconnected voice over internet protocol service companies on a tax return provided by the department. Tax proceeds must be deposited by the treasurer in the enhanced 911 account created in RCW 38.52.540.

9. For calendar year 2011, the taxes imposed by subsections (5) and (8) of this section must be set at their maximum rate. By August 31, 2011, and by August 31st of each year thereafter, the state enhanced 911 coordinator must recommend the level for the next year of the state enhanced 911 excise tax imposed by subsections (5) and (8) of this section, based on a systematic cost and revenue analysis, to the utilities and transportation commission. The commission must by the following October 31st determine the level of the state enhanced 911 excise taxes imposed by subsections (5) and (8) of this section for the following year.

\[ [2013 2nd sp.s. c 8 § 105](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/2013-14/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/House/1971-S2.SL.pdf?cite=2013%202nd%20sp.s.%20c%208%20§%20105); [2010 1st sp.s. c 19 § 3](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/2009-10/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/Senate/6846-S.SL.pdf?cite=2010%201st%20sp.s.%20c%2019%20§%203); [2007 c 54 § 17](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/2007-08/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/House/1381-S.SL.pdf?cite=2007%20c%2054%20§%2017); [2007 c 6 § 1024](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/2007-08/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/Senate/5089-S.SL.pdf?cite=2007%20c%206%20§%201024); prior:  2002 c 341 § 8; [2002 c 67 § 8](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/2001-02/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/Senate/6539.SL.pdf?cite=2002%20c%2067%20§%208); [1998 c 304 § 3](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/1997-98/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/House/1126-S.SL.pdf?cite=1998%20c%20304%20§%203); [1994 c 96 § 3](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/1993-94/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/House/2601.SL.pdf?cite=1994%20c%2096%20§%203); [1991 c 54 § 11](?cite=1991%20c%2054%20§%2011); [1981 c 160 § 3](http://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1981c160.pdf?cite=1981%20c%20160%20§%203); \]

## 82.14B.035 - Tax preferences—Expiration dates.
See RCW 82.32.805 for the expiration date of new tax preferences for the tax imposed under this chapter.

\[ [2013 2nd sp.s. c 13 § 1707](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/2013-14/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/Senate/5882-S.SL.pdf?cite=2013%202nd%20sp.s.%20c%2013%20§%201707); \]

## 82.14B.040 - Collection of tax.
Subject to the enactment into law of the 2013 amendments to RCW 82.08.0289 in section 107, chapter 8, Laws of 2013 2nd sp. sess., the 2013 amendments to RCW 80.36.430 in section 108, chapter 8, Laws of 2013 2nd sp. sess., and the 2013 amendments to RCW 43.20A.725 in section 109, chapter 8, Laws of 2013 2nd sp. sess.:

1. Except as provided otherwise in subsection (2) of this section:

   a. The state enhanced 911 excise tax and the county enhanced 911 excise tax on switched access lines must be collected from the subscriber by the local exchange company providing the switched access line.

   b. The state enhanced 911 excise tax and the county enhanced 911 excise tax on radio access lines must be collected from the subscriber by the radio communications service company, including those companies that resell radio access lines, providing the radio access line to the subscriber, and the seller of prepaid wireless telecommunications service.

   c. The state and county enhanced 911 excise taxes on interconnected voice over internet protocol service lines must be collected from the subscriber by the interconnected voice over internet protocol service company providing the interconnected voice over internet protocol service line to the subscriber.

   d. The amount of the tax must be stated separately on the billing statement which is sent to the subscriber.

2. [Empty]

   a. The state and county enhanced 911 excise taxes imposed by this chapter must be collected from the consumer by the seller of a prepaid wireless telecommunications service for each retail transaction occurring in this state.

   b. The department must transfer all tax proceeds remitted by a seller under this subsection (2) as provided in RCW 82.14B.030 (2) and (6).

   c. The taxes required by this subsection to be collected by the seller must be separately stated in any sales invoice or instrument of sale provided to the consumer.

\[ [2013 2nd sp.s. c 8 § 103](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/2013-14/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/House/1971-S2.SL.pdf?cite=2013%202nd%20sp.s.%20c%208%20§%20103); [2010 1st sp.s. c 19 § 6](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/2009-10/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/Senate/6846-S.SL.pdf?cite=2010%201st%20sp.s.%20c%2019%20§%206); [2002 c 341 § 9](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/2001-02/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/House/2595.SL.pdf?cite=2002%20c%20341%20§%209); [1998 c 304 § 4](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/1997-98/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/House/1126-S.SL.pdf?cite=1998%20c%20304%20§%204); [1994 c 96 § 4](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/1993-94/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/House/2601.SL.pdf?cite=1994%20c%2096%20§%204); [1991 c 54 § 12](?cite=1991%20c%2054%20§%2012); [1981 c 160 § 4](http://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1981c160.pdf?cite=1981%20c%20160%20§%204); \]

## 82.14B.042 - Payment and collection of taxes—Penalties for violations.
Subject to the enactment into law of the 2013 amendments to RCW 82.08.0289 in section 107, chapter 8, Laws of 2013 2nd sp. sess., the 2013 amendments to RCW 80.36.430 in section 108, chapter 8, Laws of 2013 2nd sp. sess., and the 2013 amendments to RCW 43.20A.725 in section 109, chapter 8, Laws of 2013 2nd sp. sess.:

1. [Empty]

   a. The state and county enhanced 911 excise taxes imposed by this chapter must be paid by:

      i. The subscriber to the local exchange company providing the switched access line, the radio communications service company providing the radio access line, or the interconnected voice over internet protocol service company providing the interconnected voice over internet protocol service line; or

      ii. The consumer to the seller of prepaid wireless telecommunications service.

   b. Each local exchange company, each radio communications service company, and each interconnected voice over internet protocol service company must collect from the subscriber, and each seller of prepaid wireless telecommunications service must collect from the consumer, the full amount of the taxes payable. The state and county enhanced 911 excise taxes required by this chapter to be collected by a company or seller, are deemed to be held in trust by the company or seller until paid to the department. Any local exchange company, radio communications service company, seller of prepaid wireless telecommunications service, or interconnected voice over internet protocol service company that appropriates or converts the tax collected to its own use or to any use other than the payment of the tax to the extent that the money collected is not available for payment on the due date as prescribed in this chapter is guilty of a gross misdemeanor.

2. If any local exchange company, radio communications service company, seller of prepaid wireless telecommunications service, or interconnected voice over internet protocol service company fails to collect the state or county enhanced 911 excise tax or, after collecting the tax, fails to pay it to the department in the manner prescribed by this chapter, whether such failure is the result of its own act or the result of acts or conditions beyond its control, the company or seller is personally liable to the state for the amount of the tax, unless the company or seller has taken from the buyer in good faith documentation, in a form and manner prescribed by the department, stating that the buyer is not a subscriber or consumer or is otherwise not liable for the state or county enhanced 911 excise tax.

3. The amount of tax, until paid by the subscriber to the local exchange company, the radio communications service company, the interconnected voice over internet protocol service company, or to the department, or until paid by the consumer to the seller of prepaid wireless telecommunications service, or to the department, constitutes a debt from the subscriber to the company, or from the consumer to the seller. Any company or seller that fails or refuses to collect the tax as required with intent to violate the provisions of this chapter or to gain some advantage or benefit, either direct or indirect, and any subscriber or consumer who refuses to pay any tax due under this chapter is guilty of a misdemeanor. The state and county enhanced 911 excise taxes required by this chapter to be collected by the local exchange company, radio communications service company, or interconnected voice over internet protocol service company must be stated separately on the billing statement that is sent to the subscriber.

4. If a subscriber has failed to pay to the local exchange company, radio communications service company, or interconnected voice over internet protocol service company, or a consumer has failed to pay to the seller of prepaid wireless telecommunications service, the state or county enhanced 911 excise taxes imposed by this chapter and the company or seller has not paid the amount of the tax to the department, the department may, in its discretion, proceed directly against the subscriber or consumer for collection of the tax, in which case a penalty of ten percent may be added to the amount of the tax for failure of the subscriber or consumer to pay the tax to the company or seller, regardless of when the tax is collected by the department. Tax under this chapter is due as provided under RCW 82.14B.061.

\[ [2013 2nd sp.s. c 8 § 104](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/2013-14/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/House/1971-S2.SL.pdf?cite=2013%202nd%20sp.s.%20c%208%20§%20104); [2010 1st sp.s. c 19 § 7](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/2009-10/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/Senate/6846-S.SL.pdf?cite=2010%201st%20sp.s.%20c%2019%20§%207); [2009 c 563 § 208](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/2009-10/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/Senate/6173.SL.pdf?cite=2009%20c%20563%20§%20208); [2002 c 341 § 10](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/2001-02/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/House/2595.SL.pdf?cite=2002%20c%20341%20§%2010); [2000 c 106 § 2](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/1999-00/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/House/2519.SL.pdf?cite=2000%20c%20106%20§%202); [1998 c 304 § 9](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/1997-98/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/House/1126-S.SL.pdf?cite=1998%20c%20304%20§%209); \]

## 82.14B.050 - Use of proceeds.
The proceeds of any tax collected under this chapter shall be used by the county only for the emergency services communication system.

\[ [1981 c 160 § 5](http://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1981c160.pdf?cite=1981%20c%20160%20§%205); \]

## 82.14B.055 - Use of funds voluntarily remitted.
For the time period from July 1, 2007, until January 1, 2011, counties and the state are authorized to accept and use funds and any accrued interest voluntarily remitted by interconnected voice over internet protocol service companies.

\[ [2010 1st sp.s. c 19 § 24](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/2009-10/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/Senate/6846-S.SL.pdf?cite=2010%201st%20sp.s.%20c%2019%20§%2024); \]

## 82.14B.060 - County imposition of tax—Ordinance—Department notice.
A county legislative authority imposing a tax under this chapter must establish by ordinance all necessary and appropriate procedures for the administration of the county enhanced 911 excise taxes by the department. A county legislative authority imposing a tax under this chapter must provide the department notification of the imposition of the tax or a change in the tax no less than seventy-five days before the effective date of the imposition of the tax or the change in the tax.

\[ [2010 1st sp.s. c 19 § 8](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/2009-10/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/Senate/6846-S.SL.pdf?cite=2010%201st%20sp.s.%20c%2019%20§%208); [1998 c 304 § 5](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/1997-98/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/House/1126-S.SL.pdf?cite=1998%20c%20304%20§%205); [1981 c 160 § 6](http://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1981c160.pdf?cite=1981%20c%20160%20§%206); \]

## 82.14B.061 - Administration by department—Extending reporting periods.
1. The department must administer and adopt rules as may be necessary to enforce and administer the state and county enhanced 911 excise taxes imposed or authorized by this chapter. Chapter 82.32 RCW, with the exception of RCW 82.32.045, 82.32.145, and 82.32.380, applies to the administration, collection, and enforcement of the state and county enhanced 911 excise taxes.

2. The state and county enhanced 911 excise taxes imposed or authorized by this chapter, along with reports and returns on forms prescribed by the department, are due at the same time the taxpayer reports other taxes under RCW 82.32.045. If no other taxes are reported under RCW 82.32.045, the taxpayer must remit tax on an annual basis in accordance with RCW 82.32.045.

3. The department may relieve any taxpayer or class of taxpayers from the obligation of remitting monthly and may require the return to cover other longer reporting periods, but in no event may returns be filed for a period greater than one year.

4. The state and county enhanced 911 excise taxes imposed or authorized by this chapter are in addition to any taxes imposed upon the same persons under chapters 82.08, 82.12, and 82.14 RCW.

\[ [2010 1st sp.s. c 19 § 9](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/2009-10/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/Senate/6846-S.SL.pdf?cite=2010%201st%20sp.s.%20c%2019%20§%209); [2002 c 341 § 11](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/2001-02/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/House/2595.SL.pdf?cite=2002%20c%20341%20§%2011); [2000 c 106 § 3](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/1999-00/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/House/2519.SL.pdf?cite=2000%20c%20106%20§%203); [1998 c 304 § 6](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/1997-98/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/House/1126-S.SL.pdf?cite=1998%20c%20304%20§%206); \]

## 82.14B.063 - Administration and collection by department—County enhanced 911 excise tax account created.
1. Counties imposing the enhanced 911 excise tax under RCW 82.14B.030 must contract with the department for the administration and collection of the tax. The department may deduct a percentage amount, as provided by contract, of no more than two percent of the enhanced 911 excise taxes collected to cover administration and collection expenses incurred by the department. If a county imposes an enhanced 911 excise tax with an effective date of January 1, 2011, the county must contract with the department for the administration and collection of the tax by October 15, 2010.

2. The remainder of any portion of the county enhanced 911 excise tax under RCW 82.14B.030 that is collected by the department must be deposited in the county enhanced 911 excise tax account hereby created in the custody of the state treasurer. Expenditures from the account may be used only for distribution to counties imposing the enhanced 911 excise tax. Only the director of the department or his or her designee may authorize expenditures from the account. The account is not subject to allotment procedures under chapter 43.88 RCW, and an appropriation is not required for expenditures.

\[ [2010 1st sp.s. c 19 § 4](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/2009-10/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/Senate/6846-S.SL.pdf?cite=2010%201st%20sp.s.%20c%2019%20§%204); \]

## 82.14B.065 - County enhanced 911 excise tax account distributions—Enhanced 911 excise tax imposed in excess of maximum allowable.
1. All moneys that accrue in the county enhanced 911 excise tax account created in RCW 82.14B.063 must be distributed monthly to the counties in the amount of the taxes collected on behalf of each county, minus the administration and collection fee retained by the department as provided in RCW 82.14B.063.

2. If a county imposes by resolution or ordinance an enhanced 911 excise tax that is in excess of the maximum allowable county enhanced 911 excise tax provided in RCW 82.14B.030, the ordinance or resolution may not be considered void in its entirety, but only with respect to that portion of the enhanced 911 excise tax that is in excess of the maximum allowable tax.

\[ [2010 1st sp.s. c 19 § 5](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/2009-10/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/Senate/6846-S.SL.pdf?cite=2010%201st%20sp.s.%20c%2019%20§%205); \]

## 82.14B.150 - Filing of tax returns—Credit or refund for bad debts.
1. A local exchange company, radio communications service company, or interconnected voice over internet protocol service company must file tax returns on a cash receipts or accrual basis according to which method of accounting is regularly employed in keeping the books of the company. A company filing returns on a cash receipts basis is not required to pay tax on debt subject to credit or refund under subsection (2) of this section.

2. A local exchange company, radio communications service company, or interconnected voice over internet protocol service company is entitled to a credit or refund for state and county enhanced 911 excise taxes previously paid on bad debts, as that term is used in 26 U.S.C. Sec. 166, as amended or renumbered as of January 1, 2003.

\[ [2010 1st sp.s. c 19 § 10](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/2009-10/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/Senate/6846-S.SL.pdf?cite=2010%201st%20sp.s.%20c%2019%20§%2010); [2004 c 153 § 309](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/2003-04/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/Senate/6515.SL.pdf?cite=2004%20c%20153%20§%20309); [1998 c 304 § 7](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/1997-98/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/House/1126-S.SL.pdf?cite=1998%20c%20304%20§%207); \]

## 82.14B.160 - Exemption—Activities immune from taxation under constitutions.
The taxes imposed or authorized by this chapter do not apply to any activity that the state or county is prohibited from taxing under the Constitution of this state or the Constitution or laws of the United States.

\[ [2010 1st sp.s. c 19 § 11](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/2009-10/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/Senate/6846-S.SL.pdf?cite=2010%201st%20sp.s.%20c%2019%20§%2011); [1998 c 304 § 8](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/1997-98/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/House/1126-S.SL.pdf?cite=1998%20c%20304%20§%208); \]

## 82.14B.200 - Burden of proof that sale is not to subscriber—Effect of resale certificate—Liability if no retail certificate—Penalties—Exceptions.
Subject to the enactment into law of the 2013 amendments to RCW 82.08.0289 in section 107, chapter 8, Laws of 2013 2nd sp. sess., the 2013 amendments to RCW 80.36.430 in section 108, chapter 8, Laws of 2013 2nd sp. sess., and the 2013 amendments to RCW 43.20A.725 in section 109, chapter 8, Laws of 2013 2nd sp. sess.:

1. Unless a seller, local exchange company, radio communications service company, or interconnected voice over internet protocol service company has taken from the buyer documentation, in a form and manner prescribed by the department, stating that the buyer is not a subscriber, consumer, or is otherwise not liable for the tax, the burden of proving that a sale of the use of a switched access line, radio access line, or interconnected voice over internet protocol service line was not a sale to a subscriber, consumer, or was not otherwise subject to the tax is upon the person who made the sale.

2. If a seller, local exchange company, radio communications service company, or interconnected voice over internet protocol service company does not receive documentation, in a form and manner prescribed by the department, stating that the buyer is not a subscriber, consumer, or is otherwise not liable for the tax at the time of the sale, have such documentation on file at the time of the sale, or obtain such documentation from the buyer within a reasonable time after the sale, the seller, local exchange company, radio communications service company, or interconnected voice over internet protocol service company remains liable for the tax as provided in RCW 82.14B.042, unless the seller, local exchange company, radio communications service company, or interconnected voice over internet protocol service company can demonstrate facts and circumstances according to rules adopted by the department that show the sale was properly made without payment of the state or county enhanced 911 excise tax.

3. The penalty imposed by RCW 82.32.291 may not be assessed on state or county enhanced 911 excise taxes due but not paid as a result of the improper use of documentation stating that the buyer is not a subscriber or consumer or is otherwise not liable for the state or county enhanced 911 excise tax. This subsection does not prohibit or restrict the application of other penalties authorized by law.

\[ [2013 2nd sp.s. c 8 § 106](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/2013-14/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/House/1971-S2.SL.pdf?cite=2013%202nd%20sp.s.%20c%208%20§%20106); [2010 1st sp.s. c 19 § 12](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/2009-10/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/Senate/6846-S.SL.pdf?cite=2010%201st%20sp.s.%20c%2019%20§%2012); [2009 c 563 § 209](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/2009-10/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/Senate/6173.SL.pdf?cite=2009%20c%20563%20§%20209); [2002 c 341 § 12](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/2001-02/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/House/2595.SL.pdf?cite=2002%20c%20341%20§%2012); [1998 c 304 § 10](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/1997-98/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/House/1126-S.SL.pdf?cite=1998%20c%20304%20§%2010); \]

## 82.14B.210 - Personal liability upon termination, dissolution, or abandonment of business—Exemptions—Notice—Applicability—Collections.
1. Upon termination, dissolution, or abandonment of a corporate or limited liability company business, any officer, member, manager, or other person having control or supervision of state enhanced 911 excise tax funds collected and held in trust under RCW 82.14B.042, or who is charged with the responsibility for the filing of returns or the payment of state enhanced 911 excise tax funds collected and held in trust under RCW 82.14B.042, is personally liable for any unpaid taxes and interest and penalties on those taxes, if such officer or other person willfully fails to pay or to cause to be paid any state enhanced 911 excise taxes due from the corporation under this chapter. For the purposes of this section, any state enhanced 911 excise taxes that have been paid but not collected are deductible from the state enhanced 911 excise taxes collected but not paid. For purposes of this subsection "willfully fails to pay or to cause to be paid" means that the failure was the result of an intentional, conscious, and voluntary course of action.

2. The officer, member, manager, or other person is liable only for taxes collected that became due during the period he or she had the control, supervision, responsibility, or duty to act for the corporation described in subsection (1) of this section, plus interest and penalties on those taxes.

3. Persons liable under subsection (1) of this section are exempt from liability if nonpayment of the state enhanced 911 excise tax funds held in trust is due to reasons beyond their control as determined by the department by rule.

4. Any person having been issued a notice of assessment under this section is entitled to the appeal procedures under RCW 82.32.160 through 82.32.200.

5. This section applies only if the department has determined that there is no reasonable means of collecting the state enhanced 911 excise tax funds held in trust directly from the corporation.

6. This section does not relieve the corporation or limited liability company of other tax liabilities or otherwise impair other tax collection remedies afforded by law.

7. Collection authority and procedures prescribed in chapter 82.32 RCW apply to collections under this section.

\[ [1998 c 304 § 11](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/1997-98/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/House/1126-S.SL.pdf?cite=1998%20c%20304%20§%2011); \]

