# 82.47 - Border area motor vehicle fuel and special fuel tax.
* [82.47.010 - Definitions.](#8247010---definitions)
* [82.47.020 - Tax authority.](#8247020---tax-authority)
* [82.47.030 - Proceeds.](#8247030---proceeds)
## 82.47.010 - Definitions.
For purposes of this chapter, unless the context clearly requires otherwise, "fuel," "motor vehicle fuel," "special fuel," and "motor vehicle" have the meaning given in RCW 82.38.020.

\[ [2014 c 216 § 206](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/2013-14/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/Senate/6440-S.SL.pdf?cite=2014%20c%20216%20§%20206); [1998 c 176 § 85](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/1997-98/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/House/2659-S.SL.pdf?cite=1998%20c%20176%20§%2085); [1991 c 173 § 2](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/1991-92/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/House/1342-S.SL.pdf?cite=1991%20c%20173%20§%202); \]

## 82.47.020 - Tax authority.
The legislative authority of a border area jurisdiction may, by resolution for the purposes authorized in this chapter and by approval of a majority of the registered voters of the jurisdiction voting on the proposition at a general or special election, fix and impose an excise tax on the retail sale of motor vehicle fuel and special fuel within the jurisdiction. An election held under this section must be held not more than twelve months before the date on which the proposed tax is to be levied. The ballot setting forth the proposition shall state the tax rate that is proposed. The rate of such tax shall be in increments of one-tenth of a cent per gallon and shall not exceed one cent per gallon.

The tax imposed in this section shall be collected and paid to the jurisdiction but once in respect to any motor vehicle fuel or special fuel. This tax shall be in addition to any other tax authorized or imposed by law.

For purposes of this chapter, the term "border area jurisdictions" means all cities and towns within ten miles of an international border crossing and any transportation benefit district established under RCW 36.73.020 which has within its boundaries an international border crossing.

\[ [1991 c 173 § 1](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/1991-92/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/House/1342-S.SL.pdf?cite=1991%20c%20173%20§%201); \]

## 82.47.030 - Proceeds.
The entire proceeds of the tax imposed under this chapter, less refunds authorized by the resolution imposing such tax and less amounts deducted by the border area jurisdiction for administration and collection expenses, shall be used solely for the purposes of border area jurisdiction street maintenance and construction.

\[ [1991 c 173 § 3](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/1991-92/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/House/1342-S.SL.pdf?cite=1991%20c%20173%20§%203); \]

