# 82.52 - Extension of excises to federal areas.
* [82.52.010 - State accepts provisions of federal (Buck) act.](#8252010---state-accepts-provisions-of-federal-buck-act)
* [82.52.020 - State's tax laws made applicable to federal areas—Exception.](#8252020---states-tax-laws-made-applicable-to-federal-areasexception)
## 82.52.010 - State accepts provisions of federal (Buck) act.
The state hereby accepts jurisdiction over all federal areas located within its exterior boundaries to the extent that the power and authority to levy and collect taxes therein is granted by that certain act of the 76th congress of the United States, approved by the president on October 9, 1940, and entitled: "An Act to permit the states to extend their sales, use, and income taxes to persons residing or carrying on business, or to transactions occurring, in federal areas, and for other purposes."

\[ [1961 c 15 § 82.52.010](https://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1961c15.pdf?cite=1961%20c%2015%20§%2082.52.010); [1941 c 175 § 1](https://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1941c175.pdf?cite=1941%20c%20175%20§%201); Rem. Supp. 1941 § 11337-10; \]

## 82.52.020 - State's tax laws made applicable to federal areas—Exception.
From and after January 1, 1941, all laws of this state relating to revenue and taxation which, except for this chapter and the act of congress described herein, would not be operative within federal areas, are hereby extended to, and shall be construed as being operative in and upon all lands or premises held or acquired by or for the use of the United States or any department, establishment, or agency of the United States located within the exterior boundaries of the state, to the same extent and with the same effect as though such area was not a federal area: PROVIDED, That nothing in this section shall be construed as extending the provisions of this title to the gross income received from, or to sales made for use in performing within a federal military or naval reservation, any contract entered into with the United States of America, or any department or agency thereof or any subcontract made pursuant thereto for which a bid covering such contract or subcontract was submitted prior to October 9, 1940.

\[ [1961 c 15 § 82.52.020](https://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1961c15.pdf?cite=1961%20c%2015%20§%2082.52.020); [1941 c 175 § 2](https://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1941c175.pdf?cite=1941%20c%20175%20§%202); Rem. Supp. 1941 § 11337-11; \]

