[wa-law.org](/) > [bill](/bill/) > [2023-24](/bill/2023-24/) > [SB 5113](/bill/2023-24/sb/5113/) > [Original Bill](/bill/2023-24/sb/5113/1/)

# SB 5113 - Dental school faculty

[Source](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/2023-24/Pdf/Bills/Senate%20Bills/5113.pdf)

## Section 1
The commission may, without examination, issue a license to persons who possess the qualifications set forth in this section.

1. The commission may, upon written request of the dean of the school of dentistry of any institution of higher education in Washington state accredited by the commission on dental accreditation, issue a license to practice dentistry in this state to persons who have been licensed or otherwise authorized to practice dentistry in another state or country and who have been accepted for employment by the school of dentistry as faculty members. For purposes of this subsection, this means teaching members of the faculty of any school of dentistry in any institution of higher education in Washington state accredited by the commission on dental accreditation. Such license shall permit the holder thereof to practice dentistry within the confines of the university facilities for a period of one year while he or she is so employed as a faculty member by the school of dentistry . It shall terminate whenever the holder ceases to be a faculty member. Such license shall permit the holder thereof to practice dentistry only in connection with his or her duties in employment with the school of dentistry . This limitation shall be stated on the license.

2. The commission may, upon written request of the dean of the school of dentistry of any institution of higher education in Washington state accredited by the commission on dental accreditation or the director of a postdoctoral dental residency program approved by the commission, issue a limited license to practice dentistry in this state to university postdoctoral students or residents in dental education or to postdoctoral residents in a dental residency program approved by the commission. Prior to July 1, 2010, a dental residency program must be accredited by the commission on dental accreditation, or be in the process of obtaining such accreditation, in order to be approved by the commission. On or after July 1, 2010, the dental residency program must be accredited by the commission on dental accreditation in order to be approved by the commission. The license shall permit the resident dentist to provide dental care only in connection with his or her duties as a university postdoctoral dental student or resident or a postdoctoral resident in a program approved by the commission.

3. The commission may condition the granting of a license under this section with terms the commission deems appropriate. All persons licensed under this section shall be subject to the jurisdiction of the commission to the same extent as other members of the dental profession, in accordance with this chapter, and in addition the licensee may be disciplined by the commission after a hearing has been held in accordance with the provisions set forth in this chapter, and determination by the commission that such licensee has violated any of the restrictions set forth in this section.

4. Persons applying for licensure pursuant to this section shall pay the application fee determined by the secretary and, in the event the license applied for is issued, a license fee at the rate provided for licenses generally. After review by the commission, licenses issued under this section may be renewed annually if the licensee continues to be employed as a faculty member of the school of dentistry of any institution of higher education in Washington state accredited by the commission on dental accreditation, or is a university postdoctoral student or resident in dental education, or a postdoctoral resident in a dental residency program approved by the commission, and otherwise meets the requirements of the provisions and conditions deemed appropriate by the commission. Any person who obtains a license pursuant to this section may, without an additional application fee, apply for licensure under this chapter, in which case the applicant shall be subject to examination and the other requirements of this chapter.
