# 26.10 - Nonparental actions for child custody.
* [26.10.115 - Temporary orders—Support—Restraining orders—Domestic violence or antiharassment protection orders—Notice of modification or termination of restraining order—Preservation of support debt. (Effective until July 1, 2022.)](#2610115---temporary-orderssupportrestraining-ordersdomestic-violence-or-antiharassment-protection-ordersnotice-of-modification-or-termination-of-restraining-orderpreservation-of-support-debt-effective-until-july-1-2022)
## 26.10.115 - Temporary orders—Support—Restraining orders—Domestic violence or antiharassment protection orders—Notice of modification or termination of restraining order—Preservation of support debt. (Effective until July 1, 2022.)
1. In a proceeding under this chapter either party may file a motion for temporary support of children entitled to support. The motion shall be accompanied by an affidavit setting forth the factual basis for the motion and the amount requested.

2. In a proceeding under this chapter either party may file a motion for a temporary restraining order or preliminary injunction, providing relief proper in the circumstances, and restraining or enjoining any person from:

   a. Molesting or disturbing the peace of the other party or of any child;

   b. Entering the family home or the home of the other party upon a showing of the necessity therefor;

   c. Knowingly coming within, or knowingly remaining within, a specified distance from a specified location; and

   d. Removing a child from the jurisdiction of the court.

3. Either party may request a domestic violence protection order under chapter 26.50 RCW or an antiharassment protection order under chapter 10.14 RCW on a temporary basis. The court may grant any of the relief provided in RCW 26.50.060 except relief pertaining to residential provisions for the children which provisions shall be provided for under this chapter, and any of the relief provided in RCW 10.14.080. Ex parte orders issued under this subsection shall be effective for a fixed period not to exceed fourteen days, or upon court order, not to exceed twenty-four days if necessary to ensure that all temporary motions in the case can be heard at the same time.

4. In issuing the order, the court shall consider the provisions of RCW 9.41.800, and shall order the respondent to surrender, and prohibit the respondent from possessing, all firearms, dangerous weapons, and any concealed pistol license as required in RCW 9.41.800.

5. The court may issue a temporary restraining order without requiring notice to the other party only if it finds on the basis of the moving affidavit or other evidence that irreparable injury could result if an order is not issued until the time for responding has elapsed.

6. The court may issue a temporary restraining order or preliminary injunction and an order for temporary support in such amounts and on such terms as are just and proper in the circumstances.

7. Restraining orders issued under this section restraining or enjoining the person from molesting or disturbing another party, or from going onto the grounds of or entering the home, workplace, or school of the other party or the day care or school of any child, or prohibiting the person from knowingly coming within, or knowingly remaining within, a specified distance of a location, shall prominently bear on the front page of the order the legend: VIOLATION OF THIS ORDER WITH ACTUAL NOTICE OF ITS TERMS IS A CRIMINAL OFFENSE UNDER CHAPTER 26.50 RCW AND WILL SUBJECT A VIOLATOR TO ARREST.

8. The court shall order that any temporary restraining order bearing a criminal offense legend, any domestic violence protection order, or any antiharassment protection order granted under this section be forwarded by the clerk of the court on or before the next judicial day to the appropriate law enforcement agency specified in the order. Upon receipt of the order, the law enforcement agency shall enter the order into any computer-based criminal intelligence information system available in this state used by law enforcement agencies to list outstanding warrants. Entry into the computer-based criminal intelligence information system constitutes notice to all law enforcement agencies of the existence of the order. The order is fully enforceable in any county in the state.

9. If a restraining order issued pursuant to this section is modified or terminated, the clerk of the court shall notify the law enforcement agency specified in the order on or before the next judicial day. Upon receipt of notice that an order has been terminated, the law enforcement agency shall remove the order from any computer-based criminal intelligence system.

10. A temporary order, temporary restraining order, or preliminary injunction:

    a. Does not prejudice the rights of a party or any child which are to be adjudicated at subsequent hearings in the proceeding;

    b. May be revoked or modified;

    c. Terminates when the final order is entered or when the motion is dismissed;

    d. May be entered in a proceeding for the modification of an existing order.

11. A support debt owed to the state for public assistance expenditures which has been charged against a party pursuant to RCW 74.20A.040 and/or 74.20A.055 shall not be merged in, or otherwise extinguished by, the final decree or order, unless the office of support enforcement has been given notice of the final proceeding and an opportunity to present its claim for the support debt to the court and has failed to file an affidavit as provided in this subsection. Notice of the proceeding shall be served upon the office of support enforcement personally, or by certified mail, and shall be given no fewer than thirty days prior to the date of the final proceeding. An original copy of the notice shall be filed with the court either before service or within a reasonable time thereafter. The office of support enforcement may present its claim, and thereby preserve the support debt, by filing an affidavit setting forth the amount of the debt with the court, and by mailing a copy of the affidavit to the parties or their attorney prior to the date of the final proceeding.

\[ [2019 c 245 § 18](https://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/2019-20/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/House/1786-S.SL.pdf?cite=2019%20c%20245%20§%2018); [2000 c 119 § 9](https://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/1999-00/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/Senate/6400-S2.SL.pdf?cite=2000%20c%20119%20§%209); [1995 c 246 § 29](https://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/1995-96/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/Senate/5219-S.SL.pdf?cite=1995%20c%20246%20§%2029); [1994 sp.s. c 7 § 454](https://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/1993-94/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/House/2319-S2.SL.pdf?cite=1994%20sp.s.%20c%207%20§%20454); [1989 c 375 § 32](https://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1989c375.pdf?cite=1989%20c%20375%20§%2032); \]

