# 77.110 - Salmon and steelhead trout—Management of resources.
* [77.110.010 - Declaration.](#77110010---declaration)
* [77.110.020 - Petition to congress.](#77110020---petition-to-congress)
* [77.110.030 - Management of natural resources—State policy.](#77110030---management-of-natural-resourcesstate-policy)
* [77.110.040 - Declaration—Denial of rights based on race, sex, origin, or cultural heritage.](#77110040---declarationdenial-of-rights-based-on-race-sex-origin-or-cultural-heritage)
* [77.110.900 - Transmittal of act to president and congress—1985 c 1.](#77110900---transmittal-of-act-to-president-and-congress1985-c-1)
## 77.110.010 - Declaration.
The people of the state of Washington declare that an emergency exists in the management of salmon and steelhead trout resources such that both are in great peril. An immediate resolution of this crisis is essential to perpetuating and enhancing these resources.

\[ 1985 c 1 § 1 (Initiative Measure No. 456, approved November 6, 1984); \]

## 77.110.020 - Petition to congress.
The people of the state of Washington petition the United States Congress to immediately make the steelhead trout a national game fish protected under the Black Bass Act.

\[ 1985 c 1 § 2 (Initiative Measure No. 456, approved November 6, 1984); \]

## 77.110.030 - Management of natural resources—State policy.
The people of the state of Washington declare that conservation, enhancement, and proper utilization of the state's natural resources, including but not limited to lands, waters, timber, fish, and game are responsibilities of the state of Washington and shall remain within the express domain of the state of Washington.

While fully respecting private property rights, all resources in the state's domain shall be managed by the state alone such that conservation, enhancement, and proper utilization are the primary considerations. No citizen shall be denied equal access to and use of any resource on the basis of race, sex, origin, cultural heritage, or by and through any treaty based upon the same.

\[ 1985 c 1 § 3 (Initiative Measure No. 456, approved November 6, 1984); \]

## 77.110.040 - Declaration—Denial of rights based on race, sex, origin, or cultural heritage.
The people of the state of Washington declare that under the Indians Citizens Act of 1924, all Indians became citizens of the United States and subject to the Constitution and laws of the United States and state in which they reside. The people further declare that any special off-reservation legal rights or privileges of Indians established through treaties that are denied to other citizens were terminated by that 1924 enactment, and any denial of rights to any citizen based upon race, sex, origin, cultural heritage, or by and through any treaty based upon the same is unconstitutional.

No rights, privileges, or immunities shall be denied to any citizen upon the basis of race, sex, origin, cultural heritage, or by and through any treaty based upon the same.

\[ 1985 c 1 § 4 (Initiative Measure No. 456, approved November 6, 1984); \]

## 77.110.900 - Transmittal of act to president and congress—1985 c 1.
The secretary of state shall transmit copies of this act to the president of the United States senate, the speaker of the United States house of representatives, and each member of congress.

\[ 1985 c 1 § 5 (Initiative Measure No. 456, approved November 6, 1984); \]

