# 9.61 - Malicious mischief—Injury to property.
* [9.61.160 - Threats to bomb or injure property—Penalty.](#961160---threats-to-bomb-or-injure-propertypenalty)
* [9.61.190 - Carrier or racing pigeons—Injury to.](#961190---carrier-or-racing-pigeonsinjury-to)
* [9.61.200 - Carrier or racing pigeons—Removal or alteration of identification.](#961200---carrier-or-racing-pigeonsremoval-or-alteration-of-identification)
* [9.61.230 - Telephone harassment.](#961230---telephone-harassment)
* [9.61.240 - Telephone harassment—Permitting telephone to be used.](#961240---telephone-harassmentpermitting-telephone-to-be-used)
* [9.61.250 - Telephone harassment—Offense, where deemed committed.](#961250---telephone-harassmentoffense-where-deemed-committed)
* [9.61.260 - Cyberstalking.](#961260---cyberstalking)
## 9.61.160 - Threats to bomb or injure property—Penalty.
1. It shall be unlawful for any person to threaten to bomb or otherwise injure any public or private school building, any place of worship or public assembly, any governmental property, or any other building, common carrier, or structure, or any place used for human occupancy; or to communicate or repeat any information concerning such a threatened bombing or injury, knowing such information to be false and with intent to alarm the person or persons to whom the information is communicated or repeated.

2. It shall not be a defense to any prosecution under this section that the threatened bombing or injury was a hoax.

3. A violation of this section is a class B felony punishable according to chapter 9A.20 RCW.

\[ [2003 c 53 § 38](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/2003-04/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/Senate/5758.SL.pdf?cite=2003%20c%2053%20§%2038); [1977 ex.s. c 231 § 1](http://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1977ex1c231.pdf?cite=1977%20ex.s.%20c%20231%20§%201); [1959 c 141 § 1](http://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1959c141.pdf?cite=1959%20c%20141%20§%201); \]

## 9.61.190 - Carrier or racing pigeons—Injury to.
It is a class 1 civil infraction for any person, other than the owner thereof or his or her authorized agent, to knowingly shoot, kill, maim, injure, molest, entrap, or detain any Antwerp Messenger or Racing Pigeon, commonly called "carrier or racing pigeons", having the name of its owner stamped upon its wing or tail or bearing upon its leg a band or ring with the name or initials of the owner or an identification or registration number stamped thereon.

\[ [2011 c 336 § 314](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/2011-12/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/Senate/5045.SL.pdf?cite=2011%20c%20336%20§%20314); [1987 c 456 § 25](http://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1987c456.pdf?cite=1987%20c%20456%20§%2025); [1963 c 69 § 1](http://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1963c69.pdf?cite=1963%20c%2069%20§%201); \]

## 9.61.200 - Carrier or racing pigeons—Removal or alteration of identification.
It is a class 2 civil infraction for any person other than the owner thereof or his or her authorized agent to remove or alter any stamp, leg band, ring, or other mark of identification attached to any Antwerp Messenger or Racing Pigeon.

\[ [2011 c 336 § 315](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/2011-12/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/Senate/5045.SL.pdf?cite=2011%20c%20336%20§%20315); [1987 c 456 § 26](http://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1987c456.pdf?cite=1987%20c%20456%20§%2026); [1963 c 69 § 2](http://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1963c69.pdf?cite=1963%20c%2069%20§%202); \]

## 9.61.230 - Telephone harassment.
1. Every person who, with intent to harass, intimidate, torment or embarrass any other person, shall make a telephone call to such other person:

   a. Using any lewd, lascivious, profane, indecent, or obscene words or language, or suggesting the commission of any lewd or lascivious act; or

   b. Anonymously or repeatedly or at an extremely inconvenient hour, whether or not conversation ensues; or

   c. Threatening to inflict injury on the person or property of the person called or any member of his or her family or household;

is guilty of a gross misdemeanor, except as provided in subsection (2) of this section.

2. The person is guilty of a class C felony punishable according to chapter 9A.20 RCW if either of the following applies:

   a. That person has previously been convicted of any crime of harassment, as defined in RCW 9A.46.060, with the same victim or member of the victim's family or household or any person specifically named in a no-contact or no-harassment order in this or any other state; or

   b. That person harasses another person under subsection (1)(c) of this section by threatening to kill the person threatened or any other person.

\[ [2003 c 53 § 39](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/2003-04/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/Senate/5758.SL.pdf?cite=2003%20c%2053%20§%2039); [1992 c 186 § 6](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/1991-92/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/House/2702-S.SL.pdf?cite=1992%20c%20186%20§%206); [1985 c 288 § 11](http://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1985c288.pdf?cite=1985%20c%20288%20§%2011); [1967 c 16 § 1](http://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1967c16.pdf?cite=1967%20c%2016%20§%201); \]

## 9.61.240 - Telephone harassment—Permitting telephone to be used.
Any person who knowingly permits any telephone under his or her control to be used for any purpose prohibited by RCW 9.61.230 shall be guilty of a misdemeanor.

\[ [2011 c 336 § 316](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/2011-12/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/Senate/5045.SL.pdf?cite=2011%20c%20336%20§%20316); [1967 c 16 § 2](http://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1967c16.pdf?cite=1967%20c%2016%20§%202); \]

## 9.61.250 - Telephone harassment—Offense, where deemed committed.
Any offense committed by use of a telephone as set forth in RCW 9.61.230 may be deemed to have been committed either at the place from which the telephone call or calls were made or at the place where the telephone call or calls were received.

\[ [1967 c 16 § 3](http://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1967c16.pdf?cite=1967%20c%2016%20§%203); \]

## **9.61.260 - Cyberstalking.**
1. A person is guilty of **cyber harassment** if he or she, with intent to harass**or** intimidate any other person, and under circumstances not constituting telephone harassment, makes an electronic communication to **that** person or a third party **and the communication**:

    a. **Uses** any lewd, lascivious, indecent, or obscene words, images, or language, or suggesting the commission of any lewd or lascivious act;

    b. **Is made anonymously** or repeatedly whether or not conversation occurs;

    c. **Contains a threat to inflict bodily injury immediately or in the future on the person threatened or to any other person; or**

    d. **Contains a threat to damage, immediately or in the future, the property of the person threatened or of any other person**.

2.

    a. **Except as provided in (b) of this subsection, cyber harassment is a gross misdemeanor.**

    b. **A person who commits cyber harassment is guilty of a class C felony if any of the following apply:**

        i. **The person has previously been convicted in this or any other state of any crime of harassment, as defined in RCW 9A.46.060, of the same victim or members of the victim's family or household or any person specifically named in a no-contact or no-harassment order;**

        ii. **The person cyber harasses another person under subsection (1)(a) of this section by threatening to kill the person threatened or any other person;**

        iii. **The person cyber harasses a criminal justice participant who is performing his or her official duties at the time the threat is made;**

        iv. **The person cyber harasses a criminal justice participant because of an action taken or decision made by the criminal justice participant during the performance of his or her official duties; or**

    v. **The perpetrator commits cyber harassment in violation of any protective order protecting the victim.**

**For the purposes of (b)(iii) and (iv) of this subsection, the fear from the threat must be a fear that a reasonable criminal justice participant would have under all the circumstances. Threatening words do not constitute cyber harassment if it is apparent to the criminal justice participant that the person does not have the present and future ability to carry out the threat.**

3. **Any criminal justice participant who is a target for threats or harassment prohibited under subsection (2)(b)(iii) or (iv) of this section, and any family members residing with him or her, shall be eligible for the address confidentiality program created under RCW 40.24.030.**

4. **For purposes of this section, a criminal justice participant includes any:**

    a. **Federal, state, or local law enforcement agency employee;**

    b. **Federal, state, or local prosecuting attorney or deputy prosecuting attorney;**

    c. **Staff member of any adult corrections institution or local adult detention facility;**

    d. **Staff member of any juvenile corrections institution or local juvenile detention facility;**

    e. **Community corrections officer, probation officer, or parole officer;**

    f. **Member of the indeterminate sentence review board;**

    g. **Advocate from a crime victim/witness program; or**

    h. **Defense attorney.**

5. **The penalties provided in this section for cyber harassment do not preclude the victim from seeking any other remedy otherwise available under law.**

6. Any offense committed under this section may be deemed to have been committed either at the place from which the communication was made or at the place where the communication was received.

7. For purposes of this section, "electronic communication" means the transmission of information by wire, radio, optical cable, electromagnetic, or other similar means. "Electronic communication" includes, but is not limited to, **email**, internet-based communications, pager service, and electronic text messaging.
