# 8.28 - Miscellaneous provisions.
* [8.28.010 - Where state land is involved—Service of process—Filing of decree—Duty of land commissioner.](#828010---where-state-land-is-involvedservice-of-processfiling-of-decreeduty-of-land-commissioner)
* [8.28.030 - Notice where military land is involved.](#828030---notice-where-military-land-is-involved)
* [8.28.040 - Interest on verdict fixed—Suspension during pendency of appeal.](#828040---interest-on-verdict-fixedsuspension-during-pendency-of-appeal)
* [8.28.050 - City in adjoining state may condemn watershed property.](#828050---city-in-adjoining-state-may-condemn-watershed-property)
## 8.28.010 - Where state land is involved—Service of process—Filing of decree—Duty of land commissioner.
In all condemnation proceedings brought for the purpose of appropriating any public land owned by the state or in which the state has an interest, service of process shall be made upon the commissioner of public lands.

When in any condemnation proceeding a decree is entered appropriating public lands owned by the state or in which the state has an interest, or any interest in or rights over such lands, it shall be the duty of the plaintiff to cause to be filed in the office of the commissioner of public lands a certified copy of such decree, together with a plat of the lands appropriated and the lands contiguous thereto, in form and substance as prescribed and required by the commissioner of public lands, showing in detail the lands appropriated, and to pay to the commissioner of public lands, or into the registry of the court, the amount of compensation and damages fixed and awarded in the decree. Upon receipt of such decree, plat, compensation and damages, the commissioner of public lands shall examine the same, and if he or she shall find that the final decree and proceedings comply with the original petition and notice and any amendment duly authorized, and that no additional interest of the state has been taken or appropriated through error or mistake, he or she shall cause notations thereof to be made upon the abstracts, records and tract books in his or her office, and shall issue to the plaintiff his or her certificate, reciting compliance, in substance, with the above requirements, particularly describing the lands appropriated, and shall forthwith transmit the amount received as compensation and damages to the state treasurer, as in the case of sale of land, and the subdivision of land through which any right-of-way is appropriated shall thereafter be sold or leased subject to the right-of-way.

\[ [2011 c 336 § 284](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/2011-12/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/Senate/5045.SL.pdf?cite=2011%20c%20336%20§%20284); [1927 c 255 § 104](http://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1927c255.pdf?cite=1927%20c%20255%20§%20104); RRS § 7797-104; \]

## 8.28.030 - Notice where military land is involved.
Whenever any land, real estate, premises or other property owned by the state of Washington and used for military purposes shall be involved in or affected by any eminent domain, condemnation, local improvement or other special assessment proceeding whatsoever, in addition to the notices elsewhere provided by law, the officer or board required by law to give notice of such proceedings shall cause to be served upon the adjutant general at least twenty days in advance of any hearing therein, a written notice, setting forth the nature of the proceedings, the description of such state property sought to be involved therein or affected thereby and the amount of the proposed assessment therein.

\[ [1917 c 107 § 125](http://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1917c107.pdf?cite=1917%20c%20107%20§%20125); RRS § 8600; \]

## 8.28.040 - Interest on verdict fixed—Suspension during pendency of appeal.
Whenever in any eminent domain proceeding, heretofore or hereafter instituted for the taking or damaging of private property, a verdict shall have been returned by the jury, or by the court if the case be tried without a jury, fixing the amount to be paid as compensation for the property so to be taken or damaged, such verdict shall bear interest at the maximum rate of interest permitted at that time under RCW 19.52.020 from the date of its entry to the date of payment thereof: PROVIDED, That the running of such interest shall be suspended, and such interest shall not accrue, for any period of time during which the entry of final judgment in such proceeding shall have been delayed solely by the pendency of an appeal taken in such proceeding.

\[ [1984 c 129 § 2](http://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1984c129.pdf?cite=1984%20c%20129%20§%202); [1943 c 28 § 1](http://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1943c28.pdf?cite=1943%20c%2028%20§%201); Rem. Supp. 1943 § 936-4; \]

## 8.28.050 - City in adjoining state may condemn watershed property.
That any municipal corporation of any state adjoining the state of Washington may acquire title to any land or water right within the state of Washington, by purchase or condemnation, which lies within any watershed from which said municipal corporation obtains or desires to obtain its water supply.

\[ [1909 c 16 § 1](http://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1909c16.pdf?cite=1909%20c%2016%20§%201); RRS § 9280; \]

