[wa-law.org](/) > [bill](/bill/) > [2025-26](/bill/2025-26/) > [HB 2050](/bill/2025-26/hb/2050/) > [Original Bill](/bill/2025-26/hb/2050/1/)

# HB 2050 - K-12 savings & efficiencies

[Source](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/2025-26/Pdf/Bills/House%20Bills/2050.pdf)

## Section 1
1. On or before the last business day of September 1969 and each month thereafter, the superintendent of public instruction shall apportion from the state general fund to the several educational service districts of the state the proportional share of the total annual amount due and apportionable to such educational service districts for the school districts thereof as follows:

September

9%

October

8%

November

5%

December

9%

January

8.5%

February

9%

March

9%

April

9%

May

5%

June

6.0%

July

12.5%

August

10.0%

The annual amount due and apportionable shall be the amount apportionable for all apportionment credits estimated to accrue to the schools during the apportionment year beginning September 1st and continuing through August 31st. Appropriations made for school districts for each year of a biennium shall be apportioned according to the schedule set forth in this section for the fiscal year starting September 1st of the then calendar year and ending August 31st of the next calendar year, except as provided in subsection (2) of this section. The apportionment from the state general fund for each month shall be an amount which will equal the amount due and apportionable to the several educational service districts during such month: PROVIDED, That any school district may petition the superintendent of public instruction for an emergency advance of funds which may become apportionable to it but not to exceed ten percent of the total amount to become due and apportionable during the school districts apportionment year. The superintendent of public instruction shall determine if the emergency warrants such advance and if the funds are available therefor. If the superintendent determines in the affirmative, he or she may approve such advance and, at the same time, add such an amount to the apportionment for the educational service district in which the school district is located: PROVIDED, That the emergency advance of funds and the interest earned by school districts on the investment of temporary cash surpluses resulting from obtaining such advance of state funds shall be deducted by the superintendent of public instruction from the remaining amount apportionable to said districts during that apportionment year in which the funds are advanced.

2. For the 2025-26 and 2026-27 school years, the appropriations made for school districts shall be apportioned according to the schedule set forth in subsection (1) of this section, except the following months will be apportioned as follows:

February

8%

March

8%

April

8.5%

August

12.5%

## Section 2
1. Beginning in calendar year 2020 and each calendar year thereafter, the state must provide state local effort assistance funding to supplement school district enrichment levies as provided in this section.

2. [Empty]

    a. For an eligible school district with an actual enrichment levy rate that is less than $1.50 per $1,000 of assessed value in the school district, the annual local effort assistance funding is equal to the school district's maximum local effort assistance multiplied by a fraction equal to the school district's actual enrichment levy rate divided by $1.50 per $1,000 of assessed value in the school district.

    b. For an eligible school district with an actual enrichment levy rate that is equal to or greater than $1.50 per $1,000 of assessed value in the school district, the annual local effort assistance funding is equal to the school district's maximum local effort assistance.

    c. Beginning in calendar year 2022, for state-tribal education compact schools established under chapter 28A.715 RCW, the annual local effort assistance funding is equal to the actual enrichment levy per student as calculated by the superintendent of public instruction for the previous year for the school district in which the state-tribal education compact school is located, up to a maximum per student amount of $1,550 as increased by inflation from the 2019 calendar year, multiplied by the student enrollment of the state-tribal education compact school in the prior school year.

3. The state local effort assistance funding provided under this section is not part of the state's program of basic education deemed by the legislature to comply with the requirements of Article IX, section 1 of the state Constitution.

4. The definitions in this subsection apply throughout this section unless the context clearly requires otherwise.

    a. "Eligible school district" means a school district where the amount generated by a levy of $1.50 per $1,000 of assessed value in the school district, divided by the school district's total student enrollment in the prior school year, is less than the state local effort assistance threshold.

    b. "Inflation" means, for any school year, the rate of the yearly increase of the previous calendar year's annual average consumer price index for all urban consumers, Seattle area, using the official current base compiled by the bureau of labor statistics, United States department of labor.

    c. "Maximum local effort assistance" means the difference between the following:

        i. The school district's actual prior school year enrollment multiplied by the state local effort assistance threshold; and

        ii. The amount generated by a levy of $1.50 per $1,000 of assessed value in the school district.

    d. "Prior school year" means the most recent school year completed prior to the year in which the state local effort assistance funding is to be distributed

.

    e. "State local effort assistance threshold" means $1,550 per student, increased for inflation beginning in calendar year 2020.

    f. "Student enrollment" means the average annual full-time equivalent student enrollment, reduced by the alternative learning experience adjustment. Alternative learning experience adjustment equals (f)(i) of this subsection minus (f)(ii) of this subsection if a school district's full-time equivalent student enrollment in alternative learning experience courses exceeds 33 percent of average annual full-time equivalent student enrollment.

        i. The full-time equivalent students enrolled in an alternative learning experience course.

        ii. Average annual full-time equivalent student enrollment multiplied by 33 percent.

5. For districts in a high/nonhigh relationship, the enrollments of the nonhigh students attending the high school shall only be counted by the nonhigh school districts for purposes of funding under this section.

6. For school districts participating in an innovation academy cooperative established under RCW 28A.340.080, enrollments of students attending the academy shall be adjusted so that each participant district receives its proportional share of student enrollments for purposes of funding under this section.

## Section 3
Section 1 of this act takes effect September 1, 2025.

## Section 4
Section 2 of this act takes effect January 1, 2026.
