[wa-law.org](/) > [bill](/bill/) > [2023-24](/bill/2023-24/) > [HB 1506](/bill/2023-24/hb/1506/) > [Substitute Bill](/bill/2023-24/hb/1506/S/)

# HB 1506 - DSHS leases

[Source](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/2023-24/Pdf/Bills/House%20Bills/1506-S.pdf)

## Section 1
1. The director of enterprise services, on behalf of the agency involved and after consultation with the office of financial management, shall purchase, lease, lease purchase, rent, or otherwise acquire all real estate, improved or unimproved, as may be required by elected state officials, institutions, departments, commissions, boards, and other state agencies, or federal agencies where joint state and federal activities are undertaken and may grant easements and transfer, exchange, sell, lease, or sublease all or part of any surplus real estate for those state agencies which do not otherwise have the specific authority to dispose of real estate. Any such transfer, exchange, or sale must comply with RCW 43.17.400, and may be made in accordance with RCW 39.33.015. This section does not transfer financial liability for the acquired property to the department of enterprise services.

2. Except for real estate occupied by federal agencies, the director shall determine the location, size, and design of any real estate or improvements thereon acquired or held pursuant to subsection (1) of this section. Facilities acquired or held pursuant to this chapter, and any improvements thereon, shall conform to standards adopted by the director and approved by the office of financial management governing facility efficiency unless a specific exemption from such standards is provided by the director of enterprise services. The director of enterprise services shall report to the office of financial management and the appropriate committees of the legislature annually on any exemptions granted pursuant to this subsection.

3. Except for leases permitted under subsections (4) and (5) of this section, the director of enterprise services may fix the terms and conditions of each lease entered into under this chapter, except that no lease shall extend greater than 20 years in duration. The director of enterprise services may enter into a long-term lease greater than 10 years in duration upon a determination by the director of the office of financial management that the long-term lease provides a more favorable rate than would otherwise be available, it appears to a substantial certainty that the facility is necessary for use by the state for the full length of the lease term, and the facility meets the standards adopted pursuant to subsection (2) of this section. The director of enterprise services may enter into a long-term lease greater than 10 years in duration if an analysis shows that the life-cycle cost of leasing the facility is less than the life-cycle cost of purchasing or constructing a facility in lieu of leasing the facility.

4. The director of enterprise services may fix the terms of leases for property under the department of enterprise services' control at the former Northern State Hospital site for up to 60 years.

5. The director of enterprise services may fix the terms of leases for property managed by the department of social and health services at the Fircrest residential habilitation center site for up to 99 years if the lease is for recreational, affordable housing, local government, community center, or community services purposes.

    a. All leases under this subsection that extend beyond 55 years must provide for periodic rental reevaluation and adjustment, except leases with rentals based on a percentage of income.

    b. All leases under this subsection that extend beyond 55 years must be reported to the office of financial management and the appropriate committees of the legislature within 30 days of the date of execution of the lease. The report must include a financial analysis that justifies the financial benefit for the added term and the schedule for periodic rental adjustments.

6. Except as permitted under chapter 39.94 RCW, no lease for or on behalf of any state agency may be used or referred to as collateral or security for the payment of securities offered for sale through a public offering. Except as permitted under chapter 39.94 RCW, no lease for or on behalf of any state agency may be used or referred to as collateral or security for the payment of securities offered for sale through a private placement without the prior written approval of the state treasurer. However, this limitation shall not prevent a lessor from assigning or encumbering its interest in a lease as security for the repayment of a promissory note provided that the transaction would otherwise be an exempt transaction under RCW 21.20.320. The state treasurer shall adopt rules that establish the criteria under which any such approval may be granted. In establishing such criteria the state treasurer shall give primary consideration to the protection of the state's credit rating and the integrity of the state's debt management program. If it appears to the state treasurer that any lease has been used or referred to in violation of this subsection or rules adopted under this subsection, then he or she may recommend that the governor cause such lease to be terminated. The department of enterprise services shall promptly notify the state treasurer whenever it may appear to the department that any lease has been used or referred to in violation of this subsection or rules adopted under this subsection.

7. It is the policy of the state to encourage the colocation and consolidation of state services into single or adjacent facilities, whenever appropriate, to improve public service delivery, minimize duplication of facilities, increase efficiency of operations, and promote sound growth management planning.

8. The director of enterprise services shall provide coordinated long-range planning services to identify and evaluate opportunities for colocating and consolidating state facilities. Upon the renewal of any lease, the inception of a new lease, or the purchase of a facility, the director of enterprise services shall determine whether an opportunity exists for colocating the agency or agencies in a single facility with other agencies located in the same geographic area. If a colocation opportunity exists, the director of enterprise services shall consult with the affected state agencies and the office of financial management to evaluate the impact colocation would have on the cost and delivery of agency programs, including whether program delivery would be enhanced due to the centralization of services. The director of enterprise services, in consultation with the office of financial management, shall develop procedures for implementing colocation and consolidation of state facilities.

9. The director of enterprise services is authorized to purchase, lease, rent, or otherwise acquire improved or unimproved real estate as owner or lessee and to lease or sublet all or a part of such real estate to state or federal agencies. The director of enterprise services shall charge each using agency its proportionate rental which shall include an amount sufficient to pay all costs, including, but not limited to, those for utilities, janitorial and accounting services, and sufficient to provide for contingencies; which shall not exceed five percent of the average annual rental, to meet unforeseen expenses incident to management of the real estate.

10. If the director of enterprise services determines that it is necessary or advisable to undertake any work, construction, alteration, repair, or improvement on any real estate acquired pursuant to subsection (1) or (9) of this section, the director shall cause plans and specifications thereof and an estimate of the cost of such work to be made and filed in his or her office and the state agency benefiting thereby is hereby authorized to pay for such work out of any available funds: PROVIDED, That the cost of executing such work shall not exceed the sum of $25,000. Work, construction, alteration, repair, or improvement in excess of $25,000, other than that done by the owner of the property if other than the state, shall be performed in accordance with the public works law of this state.

11. In order to obtain maximum utilization of space, the director of enterprise services shall make space utilization studies, and shall establish standards for use of space by state agencies. Such studies shall include the identification of opportunities for colocation and consolidation of state agency office and support facilities.

12. The director of enterprise services may construct new buildings on, or improve existing facilities, and furnish and equip, all real estate under his or her management. Prior to the construction of new buildings or major improvements to existing facilities or acquisition of facilities using a lease purchase contract, the director of enterprise services shall conduct an evaluation of the facility design and budget using life-cycle cost analysis, value-engineering, and other techniques to maximize the long-term effectiveness and efficiency of the facility or improvement.

13. All conveyances and contracts to purchase, lease, rent, transfer, exchange, or sell real estate and to grant and accept easements shall be approved as to form by the attorney general, signed by the director of enterprise services or the director's designee, and recorded with the county auditor of the county in which the property is located.

14. The director of enterprise services may delegate any or all of the functions specified in this section to any agency upon such terms and conditions as the director deems advisable. By January 1st of each year, beginning January 1, 2008, the department shall submit an annual report to the office of financial management and the appropriate committees of the legislature on all delegated leases.

15. This section does not apply to the acquisition of real estate by:

    a. The state college and universities for research or experimental purposes;

    b. The state liquor and cannabis board for liquor stores and warehouses;

    c. The department of natural resources, the department of fish and wildlife, the department of transportation, and the state parks and recreation commission for purposes other than the leasing of offices, warehouses, and real estate for similar purposes; and

    d. The department of commerce for community college health career training programs, offices for the department of commerce or other appropriate state agencies, and other nonprofit community uses, including community meeting and training facilities, where the real estate is acquired during the 2013‑2015 fiscal biennium.

16. Notwithstanding any provision in this chapter to the contrary, the department of enterprise services may negotiate ground leases for public lands on which property is to be acquired under a financing contract pursuant to chapter 39.94 RCW under terms approved by the state finance committee.

17. The department of enterprise services shall report annually to the office of financial management and the appropriate fiscal committees of the legislature on facility leases executed for all state agencies for the preceding year, lease terms, and annual lease costs. The report must include leases executed under RCW 43.82.045 and subsection (14) of this section.
