# 88.40 - Transport of petroleum products—Financial responsibility.
* [88.40.005 - Intent.](#8840005---intent)
* [88.40.011 - Definitions.](#8840011---definitions)
* [88.40.020 - Evidence of financial responsibility for vessels.](#8840020---evidence-of-financial-responsibility-for-vessels)
* [88.40.025 - Evidence of financial responsibility for onshore or offshore facilities.](#8840025---evidence-of-financial-responsibility-for-onshore-or-offshore-facilities)
* [88.40.030 - Establishing evidence of financial responsibility—Documentation.](#8840030---establishing-evidence-of-financial-responsibilitydocumentation)
* [88.40.040 - Entry or operation on state waters—Financial responsibility required—Enforcement of federal oil pollution act.](#8840040---entry-or-operation-on-state-watersfinancial-responsibility-requiredenforcement-of-federal-oil-pollution-act)
## 88.40.005 - Intent.
The legislature recognizes that oil and hazardous substance spills and other forms of incremental pollution present serious danger to the fragile marine environment of Washington state. It is the intent and purpose of this chapter to define and prescribe financial responsibility requirements for vessels that transport petroleum products as cargo or as fuel across the waters of the state of Washington and for facilities that store, handle, or transfer oil or hazardous substances in bulk on or near the navigable waters.

\[ [1991 c 200 § 701](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/1991-92/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/House/1027-S.SL.pdf?cite=1991%20c%20200%20§%20701); [1990 c 116 § 29](http://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1990c116.pdf?cite=1990%20c%20116%20§%2029); [1989 1st ex.s. c 2 § 1](http://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1989ex1c2.pdf?cite=1989%201st%20ex.s.%20c%202%20§%201); \]

## **88.40.011 - Definitions.**
The definitions in this section apply throughout this chapter unless the context clearly requires otherwise.

1. "Barge" means a vessel that is not self-propelled.

2. "Bulk" means material that is stored or transported in a loose, unpackaged liquid, powder, or granular form capable of being conveyed by a pipe, bucket, chute, or belt system.

3. "Cargo vessel" means a self-propelled ship in commerce, other than a tank vessel, fishing vessel, or a passenger vessel, of three hundred or more gross tons.

4. "Covered vessel" means a tank vessel, cargo vessel, or passenger vessel.

5. "Department" means the department of ecology.

6. "Director" means the director of the department of ecology.

7. [Empty]

    a. "Facility" means any structure, group of structures, equipment, pipeline, or device, other than a vessel, located on or near the navigable waters of the state that transfers oil in bulk to or from any vessel with an oil carrying capacity over two hundred fifty barrels or pipeline, that is used for producing, storing, handling, transferring, processing, or transporting oil in bulk.

    b. A facility does not include any: (i) Railroad car, motor vehicle, or other rolling stock while transporting oil over the highways or rail lines of this state; (ii) retail motor vehicle motor fuel outlet; (iii) facility that is operated as part of an exempt agricultural activity as provided in RCW 82.04.330; (iv) underground storage tank regulated by the department or a local government under chapter 70A.355 RCW; or (v) marine fuel outlet that does not dispense more than three thousand gallons of fuel to a ship that is not a covered vessel, in a single transaction.

8. "Fishing vessel" means a self-propelled commercial vessel of three hundred or more gross tons that is used for catching or processing fish.

9. "Gross tons" means tonnage as determined by the United States coast guard under 33 C.F.R. section 138.30.

10. "Hazardous substances" means any substance listed as of March 1, 2003, in Table 302.4 of 40 C.F.R. Part 302 adopted under section 102(a) of the federal comprehensive environmental response, compensation, and liability act of 1980, as amended by P.L. 99-499. The following are not hazardous substances for purposes of this chapter:

    a. Wastes listed as F001 through F028 in Table 302.4; and

    b. Wastes listed as K001 through K136 in Table 302.4.

11. "Navigable waters of the state" means those waters of the state, and their adjoining shorelines, that are subject to the ebb and flow of the tide and/or are presently used, have been used in the past, or may be susceptible for use to transport intrastate, interstate, or foreign commerce.

12. "Offshore facility" means any facility located in, on, or under any of the navigable waters of the state, but does not include a facility any part of which is located in, on, or under any land of the state, other than submerged land.

13. "Oil" or "oils" means oil of any kind that is liquid at twenty-five degrees Celsius and one atmosphere of pressure and any fractionation thereof, including, but not limited to, crude oil, bitumen, synthetic crude oil, natural gas well condensate, petroleum, gasoline, fuel oil, diesel oil, biological oils and blends, oil sludge, oil refuse, and oil mixed with wastes other than dredged spoil. Oil does not include any substance listed as of March 1, 2003, in Table 302.4 of 40 C.F.R. Part 302 adopted under section 102(a) of the federal comprehensive environmental response, compensation, and liability act of 1980, as amended by P.L. 99-499.

14. "Onshore facility" means any facility any part of which is located in, on, or under any land of the state, other than submerged land, that because of its location, could reasonably be expected to cause substantial harm to the environment by discharging oil into or on the navigable waters of the state or the adjoining shorelines.

15. [Empty]

    a. "Owner or operator" means (i) in the case of a vessel, any person owning, operating, or chartering by demise, the vessel; (ii) in the case of an onshore or offshore facility, any person owning or operating the facility; and (iii) in the case of an abandoned vessel or onshore or offshore facility, the person who owned or operated the vessel or facility immediately before its abandonment.

    b. "Operator" does not include any person who owns the land underlying a facility if the person is not involved in the operations of the facility.

16. "Passenger vessel" means a ship of three hundred or more gross tons with a fuel capacity of at least six thousand gallons carrying passengers for compensation.

17. "Ship" means any boat, ship, vessel, barge, or other floating craft of any kind.

18. "Spill" means an unauthorized discharge of oil into the waters of the state.

19. "Tank vessel" means a ship that is constructed or adapted to carry, or that carries, oil in bulk as cargo or cargo residue, and that:

    a. Operates on the waters of the state; or

    b. Transfers oil in a port or place subject to the jurisdiction of this state.

20. "Waters of the state" includes lakes, rivers, ponds, streams, inland waters, underground water, salt waters, estuaries, tidal flats, beaches and lands adjoining the seacoast of the state, sewers, and all other surface waters and watercourses within the jurisdiction of the state of Washington.

21. **"Certificate of financial responsibility" means an official written acknowledgment issued by the director or the director's designee that an owner or operator of a covered vessel or facility, or the owner of the oil, has demonstrated to the satisfaction of the director or the director's designee that the relevant entity has the financial ability to pay for costs and damages caused by an oil spill.**

## 88.40.020 - Evidence of financial responsibility for vessels.
1. Any barge that transports hazardous substances in bulk as cargo, using any port or place in the state of Washington or the navigable waters of the state shall establish evidence of financial responsibility in the amount of the greater of five million dollars, or three hundred dollars per gross ton of such vessel.

2. [Empty]

   a. Except as provided in (b) or (c) of this subsection, a tank vessel that carries oil as cargo in bulk shall demonstrate financial responsibility to pay at least five hundred million dollars. The amount of financial responsibility required under this subsection is one billion dollars after January 1, 2004.

   b. The director by rule may establish a lesser standard of financial responsibility for tank vessels of three hundred gross tons or less. The standard shall set the level of financial responsibility based on the quantity of cargo the tank vessel is capable of carrying. The director shall not set the standard for tank vessels of three hundred gross tons or less below that required under federal law.

   c. The owner or operator of a tank vessel who is a member of an international protection and indemnity mutual organization and is covered for oil pollution risks up to the amounts required under this section is not required to demonstrate financial responsibility under this chapter. The director may require the owner or operator of a tank vessel to prove membership in such an organization.

3. [Empty]

   a. A cargo vessel or passenger vessel that carries oil as fuel shall demonstrate financial responsibility to pay at least three hundred million dollars. However, a passenger vessel that transports passengers and vehicles between Washington state and a foreign country shall demonstrate financial responsibility to pay the greater of at least six hundred dollars per gross ton or five hundred thousand dollars.

   b. The owner or operator of a cargo vessel or passenger vessel who is a member of an international protection and indemnity mutual organization and is covered for oil pollution risks up to the amounts required under this section is not required to demonstrate financial responsibility under this chapter. The director may require the owner or operator of a cargo vessel or passenger vessel to prove membership in such an organization.

4. A fishing vessel while on the navigable waters of the state must demonstrate financial responsibility in the following amounts: (a) For a fishing vessel carrying predominantly nonpersistent product, one hundred thirty-three dollars and forty cents per incident, for each barrel of total oil storage capacity, persistent and nonpersistent product, on the vessel or one million three hundred thirty-four thousand dollars, whichever is greater; or (b) for a fishing vessel carrying predominantly persistent product, four hundred dollars and twenty cents per incident, for each barrel of total oil storage capacity, persistent product and nonpersistent product, on the vessel or six million six hundred seventy thousand dollars, whichever is greater.

5. The documentation of financial responsibility shall demonstrate the ability of the document holder to meet state and federal financial liability requirements for the actual costs for removal of oil spills, for natural resource damages, and for necessary expenses.

6. This section shall not apply to a covered vessel owned or operated by the federal government or by a state or local government.

\[ [2003 c 91 § 3](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/2003-04/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/Senate/6074-S.SL.pdf?cite=2003%20c%2091%20§%203); [2003 c 56 § 3](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/2003-04/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/Senate/5938.SL.pdf?cite=2003%20c%2056%20§%203); [2000 c 69 § 31](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/1999-00/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/Senate/6210-S.SL.pdf?cite=2000%20c%2069%20§%2031); [1992 c 73 § 13](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/1991-92/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/House/2389-S.SL.pdf?cite=1992%20c%2073%20§%2013); [1991 c 200 § 703](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/1991-92/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/House/1027-S.SL.pdf?cite=1991%20c%20200%20§%20703); [1990 c 116 § 31](http://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1990c116.pdf?cite=1990%20c%20116%20§%2031); [1989 1st ex.s. c 2 § 3](http://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1989ex1c2.pdf?cite=1989%201st%20ex.s.%20c%202%20§%203); \]

## **88.40.025 - Evidence of financial responsibility for onshore or offshore facilities.**
An onshore or offshore facility shall demonstrate financial responsibility in an amount determined by the department as necessary to compensate the state and affected **federally recognized Indian tribes,** counties**,** and cities for damages that might occur during a reasonable worst case spill of oil from that facility into the navigable waters of the state. The department shall **adopt by rule an amount that will be calculated by multiplying the reasonable per barrel cleanup and damage cost of the spilled oil, times the worst case spill volume, as measured in barrels, calculated in the applicant's oil spill contingency plan approved under chapter 90.56 RCW. The requirements of this section do** not apply to an onshore or offshore facility owned or operated by the federal government or by the state or local government.

## **88.40.030 - Establishing evidence of financial responsibility—Documentation.**
1. **The owner or operator of a vessel or facility that is required to demonstrate financial responsibility under this chapter may establish financial assurance by any one of, or a combination of, the following methods acceptable to the department:**

    a. **Evidence of insurance;**

    b. **Surety bonds;**

    c. **Guaranty;**

    d. **Letter of credit;**

    e. **Certificates of deposit;**

    f. **Protection and indemnity club membership;**

    g. **A certificate evidencing compliance with the requirements of another state's financial responsibility requirements or federal financial responsibility requirements if the state or federal government requires a level of financial responsibility the same as or greater than that required under this chapter; or**

    h. **Other evidence of financial responsibility deemed acceptable by the department.**

2. **In addition to the options provided in subsection (1) of this section, the owner or operator of a vessel may demonstrate financial responsibility under this chapter through qualification as a self-insurer.**

3. **Upon determining that the owner or operator of a vessel or facility has adequately demonstrated financial responsibility to the department, the department must issue a certificate of financial responsibility to the owner or operator of the vessel or facility.**

4. **Any bond filed with the department to demonstrate financial responsibility under this chapter must be issued by a bonding company authorized to do business in the United States.**

5. **A certificate of financial responsibility must** be kept on any covered vessel and filed with the department at least **24** hours before entry of the vessel into the navigable waters of the state. **The owner or operator of a** covered vessel **must notify the department but** is not required to file **a certificate of** financial responsibility **24** hours before entry of the vessel into the navigable waters of the state, if the vessel has filed documentation of financial responsibility with the federal government, and the level of financial responsibility required by the federal government is the same as or exceeds state requirements.

6. **A certificate of financial responsibility issued by the department under this chapter or otherwise used for compliance with this chapter may not have a term greater than one year.**

## **88.40.040 - Entry or operation on state waters—Financial responsibility required—Enforcement of federal oil pollution act.**
1. **The owner or operator of a vessel is not required to demonstrate financial responsibility under this chapter prior to using any port or place in Washington or state waters** when necessary to avoid injury to the vessel's crew or passengers. Any vessel owner or operator that does not meet the financial responsibility requirements of this chapter and any rules prescribed thereunder or the federal oil pollution act of 1990 shall be reported by the department to the United States coast guard.

2. (a) **Upon notification of an oil spill or discharge or other potential liability by the owner or operator of a vessel or facility that holds a certificate of financial responsibility, the director must reevaluate the validity of the certificate of financial responsibility under this chapter. The director may suspend or revoke a certificate of financial responsibility if the director determines that, because of a spill, discharge, or other action or potential liability, the holder of the certificate is likely to no longer have the financial resources to both pay damages for the oil spill or discharge or other action or potential liability and have resources remaining available in an amount sufficient to meet the requirements of this chapter.**

    b. **If a person holds a certificate of financial responsibility for more than one covered vessel or facility and a spill or spills occur from one or more of those vessels or facilities for which the director determines that the owner or operator may be liable for damages in an amount exceeding five percent of the financial resources reflected by the certificate, the certificate is immediately rendered inapplicable to any vessel or facility not associated with the spill.**

    c. **Upon a determination by the director under (b) of this subsection that a certificate has been rendered inapplicable to a vessel or facility as a result of a spill, the owner or operator of a facility or vessel required to obtain a certificate of financial responsibility under this chapter may receive a new certificate of financial responsibility from the director upon a demonstration to the satisfaction of the director the amount of financial ability required pursuant to this chapter, as well as the financial ability to pay all reasonably estimated anticipated damages that arise or have arisen from the spill or spills that have occurred.**

3. **An owner or operator of more than one vessel subject to the requirements of this chapter, more than one facility subject to the requirements of this chapter, or more than one vessel and facility subject to the requirements of this chapter, is only required to obtain a single certificate of financial responsibility that applies to all of the owner's or operator's vessels and facilities. The department must base the terms of such a certificate upon the vessel or facility that represents the greatest financial risk in the event of a spill.**

## **88.40.XXX - TBD**
**
Violations of the requirements of this chapter are subject to criminal penalties as provided in RCW 90.56.300 and civil penalties as provided in RCW 90.56.310.


[ 2021 c XXX § 6; ]**
