# 60.08 - Chattel liens.
* [60.08.010 - Lien authorized.](#6008010---lien-authorized)
* [60.08.020 - Notice of lien—Contents—Form.](#6008020---notice-of-liencontentsform)
* [60.08.030 - Priority of lien.](#6008030---priority-of-lien)
* [60.08.040 - Enforcement of lien—Limitation of action.](#6008040---enforcement-of-lienlimitation-of-action)
* [60.08.050 - Rank of lien—Personal judgment—Deficiency—Costs.](#6008050---rank-of-lienpersonal-judgmentdeficiencycosts)
* [60.08.060 - Filing notice of liens.](#6008060---filing-notice-of-liens)
* [60.08.080 - Frivolous or clearly excessive claims of lien—Motion to court—Procedures.](#6008080---frivolous-or-clearly-excessive-claims-of-lienmotion-to-courtprocedures)
* [60.08.085 - Transferring title of a vehicle—Requirements—Application to chapter  60.10 RCW.](#6008085---transferring-title-of-a-vehiclerequirementsapplication-to-chapter--6010-rcw)
## 60.08.010 - Lien authorized.
Every person, firm or corporation who shall have performed labor or furnished material in the construction or repair of any chattel at the request of its owner, shall have a lien upon such chattel for such labor performed or material furnished, notwithstanding the fact that such chattel be surrendered to the owner thereof: PROVIDED, HOWEVER, That no such lien shall continue, after the delivery of such chattel to its owner, as against the rights of third persons who, prior to the filing of the lien notice as hereinafter provided for, may have acquired the title to such chattel in good faith, for value and without actual notice of the lien.

\[ [1917 c 68 § 1](https://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1917c68.pdf?cite=1917%20c%2068%20§%201); [1909 c 166 § 1](https://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1909c166.pdf?cite=1909%20c%20166%20§%201); [1905 c 72 § 1](https://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1905c72.pdf?cite=1905%20c%2072%20§%201); RRS § 1154; \]

## 60.08.020 - Notice of lien—Contents—Form.
In order to make such lien effectual, the lien claimant shall, within ninety days from the date of delivery of such chattel to the owner, file in the office of the auditor of the county in which such chattel is kept, a lien notice, which notice shall state the name of the claimant, the name of the owner, a description of the chattel upon which the claimant has performed labor or furnished material, the amount for which a lien is claimed, and the date upon which such expenditure of labor or material was completed, which notice shall be signed by the claimant or someone on his or her behalf, and may be in substantially the following form:

CHATTEL LIEN NOTICE.. . . .against. . . .Claimant,Owner. Notice is hereby given that . . . . . . has and claims a lien upon (here insert description of chattel), owned by . . . . . . for the sum of . . . . . . dollars, for and on account of labor, skill and material expended upon said . . . . . . . . . which was completed upon the . . . . day of . . . . . ., (year) . . . . . . . . Claimant.

CHATTEL LIEN NOTICE.

. . . .

against

. . . .

Claimant,



Owner.











 

Notice is hereby given that . . . . . . has and claims a lien upon (here insert description of chattel), owned by . . . . . . for the sum of . . . . . . dollars, for and on account of labor, skill and material expended upon said . . . . . . . . . which was completed upon the . . . . day of . . . . . ., (year) . . . .

 

. . . .

 

Claimant.

\[ [2016 c 202 § 35](https://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/2015-16/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/House/2359-S.SL.pdf?cite=2016%20c%20202%20§%2035); [2012 c 117 § 131](https://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/2011-12/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/Senate/6095.SL.pdf?cite=2012%20c%20117%20§%20131); [1983 c 33 § 1](https://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1983c33.pdf?cite=1983%20c%2033%20§%201); [1917 c 68 § 2](https://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1917c68.pdf?cite=1917%20c%2068%20§%202); [1905 c 72 § 2](https://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1905c72.pdf?cite=1905%20c%2072%20§%202); RRS § 1155; \]

## 60.08.030 - Priority of lien.
The liens created by this chapter are preferred to any lien, mortgage or other encumbrance which may attach subsequently to the time of the commencement of the performance of the labor, or the furnishing of the materials for which the right of lien is given by this chapter, and are also preferred to any lien, mortgage or other encumbrance which may have attached previously to that time, and which was not filed or recorded so as to create constructive notice of the same prior to that time, and of which the lien claimant has no notice.

\[ [1917 c 68 § 3](https://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1917c68.pdf?cite=1917%20c%2068%20§%203); [1905 c 72 § 3](https://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1905c72.pdf?cite=1905%20c%2072%20§%203); RRS § 1156; \]

## 60.08.040 - Enforcement of lien—Limitation of action.
The lien herein provided for may be enforced against all persons having a junior or subsequent interest in any such chattel, by judicial procedure or by summary procedure as set forth in chapter 60.10 RCW within nine months after the filing of such lien notice, and if no such action shall be commenced within such time such lien shall cease.

\[ [1995 c 62 § 4](https://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/1995-96/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/House/1086.SL.pdf?cite=1995%20c%2062%20§%204); [1969 c 82 § 11](https://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1969c82.pdf?cite=1969%20c%2082%20§%2011); [1917 c 68 § 4](https://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1917c68.pdf?cite=1917%20c%2068%20§%204); [1905 c 72 § 4](https://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1905c72.pdf?cite=1905%20c%2072%20§%204); RRS § 1157; \]

## 60.08.050 - Rank of lien—Personal judgment—Deficiency—Costs.
In every case originating in or removed to a court of competent jurisdiction, in which different liens are claimed against the same property, the court, in the judgment, must declare the rank of such lien or class of liens, which shall be in the following order:

1. All persons performing labor;

2. All persons furnishing material;

And the proceeds of the sale of the property must be applied to each lien or class of liens in the order of its rank; and personal judgment may be rendered in an action brought to foreclose a lien, against any party personally liable for any debt for which the lien is claimed, and if the lien be established, the judgment shall provide for the enforcement thereof upon the property liable as in case of foreclosure of mortgages; and the amount realized by such enforcement of the lien shall be credited upon the proper personal judgment, and the deficiency, if any, remaining unsatisfied, shall stand as a personal judgment, and may be collected by execution against the party liable therefor. The court may allow, as part of the costs of the action, the moneys paid for filing or recording the claim, and a reasonable attorney's fee in the action.

\[ [1917 c 68 § 5](https://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1917c68.pdf?cite=1917%20c%2068%20§%205); RRS § 1157a; \]

## 60.08.060 - Filing notice of liens.
Upon presentation of such lien notice to the auditor of any county, he or she shall file the same, and endorse thereon the time of the reception, the number thereof, and shall enter the same in a suitable book or file (but need not record the same). Such book or file shall have herewith an alphabetic index, in which the county auditor shall index such notice by noting the name of the owner, name of lien claimant, description of property, date of lien (which shall be the date upon which such expenditure of labor, skill or material was completed), date of filing and when released, the date of release.

\[ [2012 c 117 § 132](https://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/2011-12/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/Senate/6095.SL.pdf?cite=2012%20c%20117%20§%20132); [1983 c 33 § 2](https://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1983c33.pdf?cite=1983%20c%2033%20§%202); [1905 c 72 § 5](https://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1905c72.pdf?cite=1905%20c%2072%20§%205); RRS § 1158; \]

## 60.08.080 - Frivolous or clearly excessive claims of lien—Motion to court—Procedures.
1. Any owner of property subject to a recorded claim of lien under this chapter, or contractor, subcontractor, lender, or lien claimant who believes the claim of lien to be frivolous and made without reasonable cause, or clearly excessive may apply by motion to the superior court for the county where the property is located, for an order directing the lien claimant to appear before the court at a time no earlier than six nor later than fifteen days following the date of service of the application and order on the lien claimant, and show cause, if any he or she has, why the relief requested should not be granted. The motion shall state the grounds upon which relief is asked, and shall be supported by the affidavit of the applicant or his or her attorney setting forth a concise statement of the facts upon which the motion is based.

2. The order shall clearly state that if the lien claimant fails to appear at the time and place noted the lien shall be released, with prejudice, and that the lien claimant shall be ordered to pay the costs requested by the applicant including reasonable attorneys' fees.

3. If no action to foreclose the lien claim has been filed, the clerk of the court shall assign a cause number to the application and obtain from the applicant a filing fee of thirty-five dollars. If an action has been filed to foreclose the lien claim, the application shall be made a part of that action.

4. The applicant must give notice of the hearing to the lien claimant by providing copies of the motion, order, and any other documents filed with the court, to the lien claimant by first-class mail, by certified or registered mail, or by personal service.

5. If, following a hearing on the matter, the court determines that the lien is frivolous and made without reasonable cause, or clearly excessive, the court shall issue an order releasing the lien if frivolous and made without reasonable cause, or reducing the lien if clearly excessive, and awarding costs and reasonable attorneys' fees to the applicant to be paid by the lien claimant. If the court determines that the lien is not frivolous and was made with reasonable cause, and is not clearly excessive, the court shall issue an order so stating and awarding costs and reasonable attorneys' fees to the lien claimant to be paid by the applicant.

6. Proceedings under this section shall not affect other rights and remedies available to the parties under this chapter or otherwise.

\[ [2006 c 283 § 1](https://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/2005-06/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/Senate/5204-S.SL.pdf?cite=2006%20c%20283%20§%201); \]

## 60.08.085 - Transferring title of a vehicle—Requirements—Application to chapter  60.10 RCW.
The department of licensing, and the department's agents and subagents, shall not transfer title of a vehicle through the chattel lien process under this chapter and chapter 60.10 RCW unless an affidavit of sale and the following documentation is submitted: (1) A certified copy of the lien filing that is filed with the county auditor; (2) a copy of the letter, sent by the lien claimant via first-class mail, and certified or registered mail, including the return receipt, to the address of the current registered owner notifying the current registered owner of the lien filing; and (3) an affidavit of service by mail.

\[ [2006 c 283 § 2](https://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/2005-06/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/Senate/5204-S.SL.pdf?cite=2006%20c%20283%20§%202); \]

