# 80.84 - Transition of eligible coal units.
* [80.84.010 - Definitions.](#8084010---definitions)
* [80.84.020 - Placement of regulatory liabilities into a retirement account—Authorization—Conditions.](#8084020---placement-of-regulatory-liabilities-into-a-retirement-accountauthorizationconditions)
## 80.84.010 - Definitions.
The definitions in this section apply throughout this chapter unless the context clearly requires otherwise.

1. "Eligible coal plant" means a coal-fired electric generation facility that: (a) Is owned in whole or in part by more than one electrical company as of January 1, 2016; and (b) provides, as a portion of the load served by the coal-fired electric generation facility, electricity paid for in rates by customers in the state of Washington.

2. "Eligible coal unit" means any generating unit of an eligible coal plant.

\[ [2019 c 288 § 16](https://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/2019-20/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/Senate/5116-S2.SL.pdf?cite=2019%20c%20288%20§%2016); [2016 c 220 § 1](https://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/2015-16/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/Senate/6248-S.SL.pdf?cite=2016%20c%20220%20§%201); \]

## 80.84.020 - Placement of regulatory liabilities into a retirement account—Authorization—Conditions.
1. The commission may, after conducting an adjudicative proceeding under chapters 34.05 and 80.04 RCW, authorize an electrical company to place amounts from one or more regulatory liabilities into a retirement account established pursuant to RCW 80.04.350 to cover decommissioning and remediation costs of eligible coal units that commenced commercial operations before January 1, 1980.

2. Regulatory liabilities placed in a retirement account pursuant to subsection (1) of this section must: (a) Not be used for any purpose other than the funding and recovery of prudently incurred decommissioning and remediation costs for such eligible coal units; (b) except as provided in RCW 80.04.350, not be reduced, altered, impaired, or limited from the date of commission approval of the inclusion of the regulatory liabilities in the retirement account until all prudently incurred decommissioning and remediation costs for such coal units are recovered or paid in full; and (c) provide that any remaining funds in the retirement account, after recovery by the electrical company of all prudently incurred decommissioning and remediation costs for such eligible coal units, be returned to customers.

\[ [2016 c 220 § 2](https://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/2015-16/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/Senate/6248-S.SL.pdf?cite=2016%20c%20220%20§%202); \]

