[wa-law.org](/) > [bills](/bills/) > [2023-24](/bills/2023-24) > [HB 1345](/bills/2023-24/hb/1345/) > [Original Bill](/bills/2023-24/hb/1345/1/)

# HB 1345 - Concerning the contribution to costs of privileges by incarcerated individuals.

[Source](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/2023-24/Pdf/Bills/House%20Bills/1345.pdf)

## Section 1
To the greatest extent practical, all inmates shall contribute to the cost of privileges. The department may require inmates to contribute to the cost of specific privileges designated by the department in accordance with standards that the department shall develop and adopt to ensure that inmates contribute a portion of the department's costs directly associated with providing designated privileges. The department shall establish standards by which inmates shall contribute a portion of the department's capital costs of providing privileges, including television cable access,  weight lifting, and other recreational sports equipment and supplies. The standards shall also require inmates to contribute a  portion of the department's operating costs directly associated with providing privileges, including staff and supplies. Inmate contributions may be in the form of individual user fees assessed against an inmate's institution account, deductions from an inmate's gross wages or gratuities, or inmates' collective contributions to the institutional welfare/betterment fund. The department shall make every effort to maximize individual inmate contributions to payment for privileges. The department shall not limit inmates' financial support for privileges to contributions from the institutional welfare/betterment fund. The standards shall consider the assets available to the inmates, the cost of administering compliance with the contribution requirements, and shall promote a responsible work ethic.
