# 7.21 - Contempt of court.
* [7.21.010 - Definitions.](#721010---definitions)
* [7.21.020 - Sanctions—Who may impose.](#721020---sanctionswho-may-impose)
* [7.21.030 - Remedial sanctions—Payment for losses. (Effective until July 1, 2023.)](#721030---remedial-sanctionspayment-for-losses-effective-until-july-1-2023)
* [7.21.040 - Punitive sanctions—Fines.](#721040---punitive-sanctionsfines)
* [7.21.050 - Sanctions—Summary imposition—Procedure.](#721050---sanctionssummary-impositionprocedure)
* [7.21.060 - Administrative actions or proceedings—Petition to court for imposition of sanctions.](#721060---administrative-actions-or-proceedingspetition-to-court-for-imposition-of-sanctions)
* [7.21.070 - Appellate review.](#721070---appellate-review)
* [7.21.080 - Juvenile detention as remedy.](#721080---juvenile-detention-as-remedy)
## 7.21.010 - Definitions.
The definitions in this section apply throughout this chapter:

1. "Contempt of court" means intentional:

   a. Disorderly, contemptuous, or insolent behavior toward the judge while holding the court, tending to impair its authority, or to interrupt the due course of a trial or other judicial proceedings;

   b. Disobedience of any lawful judgment, decree, order, or process of the court;

   c. Refusal as a witness to appear, be sworn, or, without lawful authority, to answer a question; or

   d. Refusal, without lawful authority, to produce a record, document, or other object.

2. "Punitive sanction" means a sanction imposed to punish a past contempt of court for the purpose of upholding the authority of the court.

3. "Remedial sanction" means a sanction imposed for the purpose of coercing performance when the contempt consists of the omission or refusal to perform an act that is yet in the person's power to perform.

\[ [1989 c 373 § 1](https://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1989c373.pdf?cite=1989%20c%20373%20§%201); \]

## 7.21.020 - Sanctions—Who may impose.
A judge or commissioner of the supreme court, the court of appeals, or the superior court, a judge of a court of limited jurisdiction, and a commissioner of a court of limited jurisdiction may impose a sanction for contempt of court under this chapter.

\[ [1998 c 3 § 1](https://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/1997-98/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/House/1082.SL.pdf?cite=1998%20c%203%20§%201); [1989 c 373 § 2](https://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1989c373.pdf?cite=1989%20c%20373%20§%202); \]

## 7.21.030 - Remedial sanctions—Payment for losses. (Effective until July 1, 2023.)
1. The court may initiate a proceeding to impose a remedial sanction on its own motion or on the motion of a person aggrieved by a contempt of court in the proceeding to which the contempt is related. Except as provided in RCW 7.21.050, the court, after notice and hearing, may impose a remedial sanction authorized by this chapter.

2. If the court finds that the person has failed or refused to perform an act that is yet within the person's power to perform, the court may find the person in contempt of court and impose one or more of the following remedial sanctions:

   a. Imprisonment if the contempt of court is of a type defined in RCW 7.21.010(1) (b) through (d). The imprisonment may extend only so long as it serves a coercive purpose.

   b. A forfeiture not to exceed two thousand dollars for each day the contempt of court continues.

   c. An order designed to ensure compliance with a prior order of the court.

   d. Any other remedial sanction other than the sanctions specified in (a) through (c) of this subsection if the court expressly finds that those sanctions would be ineffectual to terminate a continuing contempt of court.

   e. [Empty]

      i. In at-risk youth petition cases only under chapter 13.32A RCW and subject to the requirements under RCW 13.32A.250, commitment to juvenile detention for a period of time not to exceed seventy-two hours, excluding Saturdays, Sundays, and holidays. The seventy-two hour period shall commence upon the next nonholiday weekday following the court order and shall run to the end of the last nonholiday weekday within the seventy-two hour period. This sanction may be imposed in addition to, or as an alternative to, any other remedial sanction authorized by this chapter. This remedy is specifically determined to be a remedial sanction.

      ii. Prior to committing any youth to juvenile detention as a sanction for contempt in at-risk youth petition cases only under chapter 13.32A RCW, or for failure to appear at a court hearing in at-risk youth petition cases only under chapter 13.32A RCW, the court must:

          A.  Consider, on the record, the mitigating and aggravating factors used to determine the appropriateness of detention for enforcement of its order;

          B.  Enter written findings affirming that it considered all less restrictive options, that detention is the only appropriate alternative, including its rationale and the clear, cogent, and convincing evidence used to enforce the order;

          C.  Afford the same due process considerations that it affords all youth in criminal contempt proceedings; and

          D.  Seek input from all relevant parties, including the youth.

      iii. Detention periods for youth sanctioned to juvenile detention for contempt in at-risk youth petition cases only under chapter 13.32A RCW, or for failure to appear at a court hearing in at-risk youth petition cases only under chapter 13.32A RCW, shall be:

           A.  No more than seventy-two hours, regardless of the number of violations being considered at the hearing; and

           B.  Limited to no more than two sanctions, up to seventy-two hours each, in any thirty-day period.

      iv. Nothing in this subsection (2)(e) or in RCW 13.32A.250, 13.34.165, or 28A.225.090 shall be construed to limit the court's inherent contempt power or curtail its exercise.

3. The court may, in addition to the remedial sanctions set forth in subsection (2) of this section, order a person found in contempt of court to pay a party for any losses suffered by the party as a result of the contempt and any costs incurred in connection with the contempt proceeding, including reasonable attorney's fees.

4. If the court finds that a person under the age of eighteen years has willfully disobeyed the terms of an order issued under *chapter 10.14 RCW, the court may find the person in contempt of court and may, as a sole sanction for such contempt, commit the person to juvenile detention for a period of time not to exceed seven days.

\[ [2019 c 312 § 5](https://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/2019-20/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/Senate/5290-S2.SL.pdf?cite=2019%20c%20312%20§%205); [2019 c 312 § 4](https://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/2019-20/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/Senate/5290-S2.SL.pdf?cite=2019%20c%20312%20§%204); [2019 c 312 § 3](https://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/2019-20/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/Senate/5290-S2.SL.pdf?cite=2019%20c%20312%20§%203); [2001 c 260 § 6](https://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/2001-02/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/House/1041-S2.SL.pdf?cite=2001%20c%20260%20§%206); [1998 c 296 § 36](https://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/1997-98/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/Senate/6208-S.SL.pdf?cite=1998%20c%20296%20§%2036); [1989 c 373 § 3](https://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1989c373.pdf?cite=1989%20c%20373%20§%203); \]

## 7.21.040 - Punitive sanctions—Fines.
1. Except as otherwise provided in RCW 7.21.050, a punitive sanction for contempt of court may be imposed only pursuant to this section.

2. [Empty]

   a. An action to impose a punitive sanction for contempt of court shall be commenced by a complaint or information filed by the prosecuting attorney or city attorney charging a person with contempt of court and reciting the punitive sanction sought to be imposed.

   b. If there is probable cause to believe that a contempt has been committed, the prosecuting attorney or city attorney may file the information or complaint on his or her own initiative or at the request of a person aggrieved by the contempt.

   c. A request that the prosecuting attorney or the city attorney commence an action under this section may be made by a judge presiding in an action or proceeding to which a contempt relates. If required for the administration of justice, the judge making the request may appoint a special counsel to prosecute an action to impose a punitive sanction for contempt of court.

A judge making a request pursuant to this subsection shall be disqualified from presiding at the trial.

   d. If the alleged contempt involves disrespect to or criticism of a judge, that judge is disqualified from presiding at the trial of the contempt unless the person charged consents to the judge presiding at the trial.

3. The court may hold a hearing on a motion for a remedial sanction jointly with a trial on an information or complaint seeking a punitive sanction.

4. A punitive sanction may be imposed for past conduct that was a contempt of court even though similar present conduct is a continuing contempt of court.

5. If the defendant is found guilty of contempt of court under this section, the court may impose for each separate contempt of court a fine of not more than five thousand dollars or imprisonment for up to three hundred sixty-four days, or both.

\[ [2011 c 96 § 3](https://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/2011-12/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/Senate/5168-S.SL.pdf?cite=2011%20c%2096%20§%203); [2009 c 37 § 1](https://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/2009-10/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/House/1218.SL.pdf?cite=2009%20c%2037%20§%201); [1989 c 373 § 4](https://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1989c373.pdf?cite=1989%20c%20373%20§%204); \]

## 7.21.050 - Sanctions—Summary imposition—Procedure.
1. The judge presiding in an action or proceeding may summarily impose either a remedial or punitive sanction authorized by this chapter upon a person who commits a contempt of court within the courtroom if the judge certifies that he or she saw or heard the contempt. The judge shall impose the sanctions immediately after the contempt of court or at the end of the proceeding and only for the purpose of preserving order in the court and protecting the authority and dignity of the court. The person committing the contempt of court shall be given an opportunity to speak in mitigation of the contempt unless compelling circumstances demand otherwise. The order of contempt shall recite the facts, state the sanctions imposed, and be signed by the judge and entered on the record.

2. A court, after a finding of contempt of court in a proceeding under subsection (1) of this section may impose for each separate contempt of court a punitive sanction of a fine of not more than five hundred dollars or imprisonment for not more than thirty days, or both, or a remedial sanction set forth in RCW 7.21.030(2). A forfeiture imposed as a remedial sanction under this subsection may not exceed more than five hundred dollars for each day the contempt continues.

\[ [2009 c 37 § 2](https://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/2009-10/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/House/1218.SL.pdf?cite=2009%20c%2037%20§%202); [1989 c 373 § 5](https://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1989c373.pdf?cite=1989%20c%20373%20§%205); \]

## 7.21.060 - Administrative actions or proceedings—Petition to court for imposition of sanctions.
A state administrative agency conducting an action or proceeding or a party to the action or proceeding may petition the superior court in the county in which the action or proceeding is being conducted for a remedial sanction specified in RCW 7.21.030 for conduct specified in RCW 7.21.010 in the action or proceeding.

\[ [1989 c 373 § 6](https://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1989c373.pdf?cite=1989%20c%20373%20§%206); \]

## 7.21.070 - Appellate review.
A party in a proceeding or action under this chapter may seek appellate review under applicable court rules. Appellate review does not stay the proceedings in any other action, suit, or proceeding, or any judgment, decree, or order in the action, suit, or proceeding to which the contempt relates.

\[ [1989 c 373 § 7](https://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1989c373.pdf?cite=1989%20c%20373%20§%207); \]

## 7.21.080 - Juvenile detention as remedy.
1. It is the policy of the state of Washington to eliminate the use of juvenile detention as a remedy for contempt of a valid court order for youth under chapters 13.34 and 28A.225 RCW and child in need of services petition youth under chapter 13.32A RCW.

   a. Beginning July 1, 2020, youth may not be committed to juvenile detention as a contempt sanction under chapter 13.34 RCW, and a warrant may not be issued for such youth for failure to appear at a court hearing that requires commitment of such youth to juvenile detention.

   b. Beginning July 1, 2020, youth may not be committed to juvenile detention as a contempt sanction for child in need of services proceedings under chapter 13.32A RCW, and a warrant may not be issued for such youth for failure to appear at a court hearing that requires commitment of such youth to juvenile detention.

   c. Beginning July 1, 2021, youth may not be committed to juvenile detention as a contempt sanction for truancy proceedings under chapter 28A.225 RCW, and a warrant may not be issued for such youth for failure to appear at a court hearing that requires commitment of such youth to juvenile detention.

2. [Empty]

   a. It is also the policy of the state of Washington to entirely phase out the use of juvenile detention as a remedy for contempt of a valid court order for at-risk youth under chapter 13.32A RCW by July 1, 2023. After this date, at-risk youth may not be committed to juvenile detention as a contempt sanction under chapter 13.32A RCW, and a warrant may not be issued for failure to appear at a court hearing that requires commitment of the at-risk youth to juvenile detention.

   b. Until July 1, 2023, any at-risk youth committed to juvenile detention as a sanction for contempt under chapter 13.32A RCW, or for failure to appear at a court hearing under chapter 13.32A RCW, must be detained in such a manner so that no direct communication or physical contact may be made between the youth and any youth who is detained to juvenile detention pursuant to a violation of criminal law, unless these separation requirements would result in a youth being detained in solitary confinement.

   c. After July 1, 2023, at-risk youth may be committed to a secure residential program with intensive wraparound services, subject to the requirements under RCW 13.32A.250, as a remedial sanction for contempt under chapter 13.32A RCW or for failure to appear at a court hearing under chapter 13.32A RCW.

\[ [2019 c 312 § 2](https://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/2019-20/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/Senate/5290-S2.SL.pdf?cite=2019%20c%20312%20§%202); \]

