# 53.31 - Export trading companies.
* [53.31.010 - Legislative findings—Intent.](#5331010---legislative-findingsintent)
* [53.31.020 - Definitions.](#5331020---definitions)
* [53.31.030 - Export trading companies—Authorized—Adoption of business plan.](#5331030---export-trading-companiesauthorizedadoption-of-business-plan)
* [53.31.040 - Export trading companies—Powers—Formation—Dissolution.](#5331040---export-trading-companiespowersformationdissolution)
* [53.31.050 - Confidentiality of records supplied by private persons.](#5331050---confidentiality-of-records-supplied-by-private-persons)
* [53.31.060 - Certificate of review under federal export trading company act—Authorized.](#5331060---certificate-of-review-under-federal-export-trading-company-actauthorized)
## 53.31.010 - Legislative findings—Intent.
It is declared to be the public policy of the state to promote and preserve the economic well-being of the citizens of this state by creating opportunities for expanded participation in international trade by state businesses and expanding international trade through state ports. Increased international trade of state products creates and retains jobs, increases the state's tax base, and diversifies the state's economy. Port districts, through economies of scale, are uniquely situated to promote and expand international trade and provide greater opportunities for state businesses to participate in international trade.

The legislature finds that significant public benefit, in the form of increased employment and tax revenues, can be realized through export trading companies without lending the credit of port districts, and without capital investment of public funds by port districts. The legislature finds that the use of port district funds to promote and establish export trading companies under this chapter constitutes trade promotion and industrial development within the meaning of Article VIII, section 8 of the state Constitution.

It is the purpose of this chapter: (1) To stimulate greater participation by private businesses in international trade; (2) to authorize port districts to promote and facilitate international trade more actively; (3) to make export services more widely available; (4) to generate revenue for port districts; and (5) to develop markets for Washington state goods and services. Port sponsored export trading companies can also assist small to medium-sized companies in achieving economies of scale in order to expand into the export market.

It is the intent of this chapter to enhance export trade and not to create outside competition for existing Washington state businesses. The primary intent of a port sponsored export trading company is to increase exports of Washington state products.

This chapter shall not be construed as modifying or restricting any other powers granted to port districts by law. The legislature does not intend by the enactment of this chapter for port districts to use export trading companies to create unfair competition with private business.

\[ [1986 c 276 § 1](https://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1986c276.pdf?cite=1986%20c%20276%20§%201); \]

## 53.31.020 - Definitions.
Unless the context clearly requires otherwise, the definitions in this section apply throughout this chapter.

1. "Port district" means any port district other than a countywide port district in a county with a population of two hundred ten thousand or more, established under Title 53 RCW.

2. "Export services" means the following services when provided in order to facilitate the export of goods or services through Washington ports: International market research, promotion, consulting, marketing, legal assistance, trade documentation, communication and processing of foreign orders to and for exporters and foreign purchasers, financing, and contracting or arranging for transportation, insurance, warehousing, foreign exchange, and freight forwarding.

3. "Export trading company" means an entity created by a port district under RCW 53.31.040.

4. "Obligations" means bonds, notes, securities, or other obligations or evidences of indebtedness.

5. "Person" means any natural person, firm, partnership, association, private or public corporation, or governmental entity.

\[ [1991 c 363 § 133](https://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/1991-92/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/House/1201-S.SL.pdf?cite=1991%20c%20363%20§%20133); [1986 c 276 § 2](https://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1986c276.pdf?cite=1986%20c%20276%20§%202); \]

## 53.31.030 - Export trading companies—Authorized—Adoption of business plan.
1. Public port districts, formed under chapter 53.04 RCW are authorized to establish export trading companies and a company so formed may contract with other public ports, financial institutions, freight forwarders, and public or private concerns within or outside the state to carry out the purposes of this chapter. A port district may participate financially in only one export trading company.

2. A port district proposing to establish an export trading company shall adopt a business plan with safeguards and limitations to ensure that any private benefit to be realized from the use of funds of the export trading company are incidental to the purposes of this chapter. The business plan shall be adopted only after public hearing and shall be reviewed at least once every two years. Amendments to the plan shall be adopted only after public hearing. The business plan shall include:

   a. A description of export promotion activities to be conducted during the period of the plan;

   b. A proposed budget of operations which shall include an itemized list of estimated revenues and expenditures;

   c. A description of the safeguards and limitations which ensure that the export trading company will best be used to enhance international trade and produce public benefit in the form of employment, capital investment, and tax revenues;

   d. A description of private competitors which may be capable of providing the functions in the business plan; and

   e. Such other matters as may be determined by the port district.

3. A port district, for the purpose of establishing or promoting an export trading company under this chapter, may provide financial assistance to the export trading company. A port district may not provide such assistance or services for more than five years or in an amount greater than five hundred thousand dollars.

\[ [1986 c 276 § 3](https://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1986c276.pdf?cite=1986%20c%20276%20§%203); \]

## 53.31.040 - Export trading companies—Powers—Formation—Dissolution.
1. For the purpose of promoting international trade, export trading companies formed under this chapter may provide export services through:

   a. Holding and disposing of goods in international trade;

   b. Taking title to goods.

All such activities engaged in or pursued by an export trading company shall be charged for in accordance with the customs of the trade at competitive market rates.

2. Nothing contained in this chapter may be construed to authorize an export trading company to own or operate directly or indirectly any business which provides freight-forwarding, insurance, foreign exchange, or warehousing services. Nothing contained in this chapter may be construed to permit an export trading company to engage in the business of transporting commodities by motor vehicle, barge, ship, or rail for compensation.

3. [Empty]

   a. Proceedings to form a public corporation designated as an export trading company shall be initiated by a resolution of the board of commissioners of a port district adopting a charter for the corporation. The charter shall contain such provisions as are authorized by law and include provisions for a board of directors which shall conduct the affairs of the export trading company. The board of directors shall include no fewer than three nor more than five members, all appointed by the port district board of commissioners. Commissioners of the port shall be eligible to serve as members of the board and shall constitute a majority of the board of directors at all times. Unless a later date is specified, the resolution shall take effect on the thirtieth day after adoption. The corporation shall be deemed formed for all purposes upon filing in the office of the secretary of state a certified copy of the effective resolution and the charter adopted by the resolution.

   b. In any suit, action, or proceeding involving the validity or enforcement of or relating to any contract of the corporation, the corporation is conclusively presumed to be established and authorized to transact business and exercise its powers under this chapter upon proof of the adoption of the resolution creating the corporation by the governing body. A copy of the resolution duly certified by the secretary of the port district commission shall be admissible in evidence in any suit, action, or proceeding.

   c. A corporation created by a port district pursuant to this chapter may be dissolved by the district if the corporation (i) has no property to administer, other than funds or property, if any, to be paid or transferred to the district by which it was established; and (ii) all its outstanding obligations have been satisfied. Such a dissolution shall be accomplished by the governing body of the port district adopting a resolution providing for the dissolution.

   d. The creating port district may, at its discretion and at any time, alter or change the structure, organizational programs, or activities of the corporation, including termination of the corporation if contracts entered into by the corporation are not impaired. Subject to any contractual obligations, any net earnings of the corporation shall inure only to the benefit of the creating port district. Upon dissolution of the corporation, all assets and title to all property owned by the corporation shall vest in the creating port district.

4. A port district may contract with an export trading company to provide services on a reimbursement basis at current business rates to the export trading company, including but not limited to accounting, legal, clerical, technical, and other administrative services. Separate accounting records prepared according to generally accepted accounting principles shall be maintained by the export trading company.

5. Any obligation of an export trading company shall not in any manner be an obligation of the port district nor a charge upon any revenues or property of the port district.

6. An export trading company may borrow money or contract indebtedness and pledge, in whole or in part, any of its revenues or assets not subject to prior liens or pledges. An export trading company may not pledge any revenue or property of a port district or other municipal corporation and no port district or other municipal corporation may pledge its revenues or property to the payment thereof. An export trading company has no power to issue general obligation bonds, levy taxes, or exercise power of eminent domain.

\[ [1989 c 11 § 23](https://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1989c11.pdf?cite=1989%20c%2011%20§%2023); [1986 c 276 § 4](https://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1986c276.pdf?cite=1986%20c%20276%20§%204); \]

## 53.31.050 - Confidentiality of records supplied by private persons.
All financial and commercial information and records supplied by private persons to an export trading company with respect to export projects shall be kept confidential unless such confidentiality shall be waived by the party supplying the information or by all parties engaged in the discussion.

\[ [1986 c 276 § 5](https://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1986c276.pdf?cite=1986%20c%20276%20§%205); \]

## 53.31.060 - Certificate of review under federal export trading company act—Authorized.
An export trading company may apply for and hold a certificate of review provided for under 15 U.S.C. Secs. 4001 through 4021, the federal export trading company act of 1982.

\[ [1986 c 276 § 6](https://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1986c276.pdf?cite=1986%20c%20276%20§%206); \]

