# 64.20 - Alienation of land by Indians.
* [64.20.010 - Puyallup Indians—Right of alienation.](#6420010---puyallup-indiansright-of-alienation)
* [64.20.025 - Puyallup Indians—Right of alienation—When effective.](#6420025---puyallup-indiansright-of-alienationwhen-effective)
* [64.20.030 - Sale of land or materials authorized.](#6420030---sale-of-land-or-materials-authorized)
## 64.20.010 - Puyallup Indians—Right of alienation.
The said Indians who now hold, or who may hereafter hold, any of the lands of any reservation, in severalty, located in this state by virtue of treaties made between them and the United States, shall have power to lease, incumber, grant and alien the same in like manner and with like effect as any other person may do under the laws of the United States and of this state, and all restrictions in reference thereto are hereby removed.

\[ [1890 p 500 § 1](https://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1890c500.pdf?cite=1890%20p%20500%20§%201); RRS § 10593; \]

## 64.20.025 - Puyallup Indians—Right of alienation—When effective.
*This act shall take effect and be in force from and after the consent to such removal of the restrictions shall have been given by the congress of the United States.

\[ [1890 p 501 § 3](https://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1890c501.pdf?cite=1890%20p%20501%20§%203); no RRS; \]

## 64.20.030 - Sale of land or materials authorized.
Any Indian who owns within this state any land or real estate allotted to him or her by the government of the United States may with the consent of congress, either special or general, sell and convey by deed made, executed, and acknowledged before any officer authorized to take acknowledgments to deeds within this state, any stone, mineral, petroleum, or timber contained on said land or the fee thereof and such conveyance shall have the same effect as a deed of any other person or persons within this state; it being the intention of this section to remove from Indians residing in this state all existing disabilities relating to alienation of their real estate.

\[ [2012 c 117 § 196](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/2011-12/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/Senate/6095.SL.pdf?cite=2012%20c%20117%20§%20196); [1899 c 96 § 1](https://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1899c96.pdf?cite=1899%20c%2096%20§%201); RRS § 10595; \]

