[wa-law.org](/) > [bill](/bill/) > [2025-26](/bill/2025-26/) > [SB 5814](/bill/2025-26/sb/5814/) > [Original Bill](/bill/2025-26/sb/5814/1/)

# SB 5814 - Excise taxes

[Source](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/2025-26/Pdf/Bills/Senate%20Bills/5814.pdf)

## Section 1
The legislature finds that, through the state's general fund, the state funds public schools, health care, and social services that help Washingtonians to succeed and thrive. These revenues help the state meet its paramount duty to amply provide every child in the state with an education, including children who qualify for special education services, creating the opportunity for each child to succeed in school and achieve success in life. Revenues generated by this act will support health care and other programs that protect the safety and well-being of the public, including behavioral health services for those living with mental illness or substance use disorder, as well as supervision of individuals who have committed crimes. These revenues will also fund social services that provide critical, basic needs assistance for our state's most vulnerable residents, including support for those with developmental disabilities and long-term care for the elderly.

Furthermore, the legislature finds that the state's tax code must be periodically reviewed and updated to ensure that tax policy reflects our modern economy. The legislature recognizes that our state and nation have moved away from a predominantly goods-based economy towards a more service-based economy. As a result, Washington's tax code, which is heavily reliant on sales taxes, continues to reach a narrowing share of economic activity subject to the retail sales tax. Similar to the marketplace fairness act of 2017, which extended retail sales tax to remote retailers with no physical presence in the state to ensure the tax code reflected the growing shift of retail sales toward online sales and away from brick-and-mortar stores located in the state, so too must this legislature consider extending the retail sales tax to computer-related services, as well as remove exemptions to the retail sales tax for digital automated services which have not been updated since 2009, and other services to which it is more appropriate to apply retail sales tax in the state's current economy. The legislature further recognizes that taxes on tobacco products, which have largely gone unchanged over the last several decades, do not adequately capture new and emerging nicotine products. As certain new products come onto the market, they are exempt from excise tax, creating an unfair advantage in the market against their competitors.

Thus, to help meet the state's paramount duty of amply providing every child in the state with an education and to support the health and well-being of Washingtonians, the legislature intends to modernize the sales tax and taxes on nicotine products by extending retail sales tax to select services, repealing certain sales tax exemptions, applying taxes on tobacco to new nicotine products, and requiring certain large businesses to make a one-time prepayment of state sales tax collections.

## Section 101
(1)(a) "Sale at retail" or "retail sale" means every sale of tangible personal property (including articles produced, fabricated, or imprinted) to all persons irrespective of the nature of their business and including, among others, without limiting the scope hereof, persons who install, repair, clean, alter, improve, construct, or decorate real or personal property of or for consumers other than a sale to a person who:

## Section 201
1. "Digital audio works" means works that result from the fixation of a series of musical, spoken, or other sounds, including ringtones.

2. "Digital audiovisual works" means a series of related images which, when shown in succession, impart an impression of motion, together with accompanying sounds, if any.

3. [Empty]

    a. "Digital automated service," except as provided in (b) of this subsection (3), means any service transferred electronically that uses one or more software applications.

    b. "Digital automated service" does not include:

        i.

The loaning or transferring of money or the purchase, sale, or transfer of financial instruments. For purposes of this subsection (3)(b)(i), "financial instruments" include cash, accounts receivable and payable, loans and notes receivable and payable, debt securities, equity securities, as well as derivative contracts such as forward contracts, swap contracts, and options;

        ii. Dispensing cash or other physical items from a machine;

        iii. Payment processing services;

        iv. Parimutuel wagering and handicapping contests as authorized by chapter 67.16 RCW;

    v. Telecommunications services and ancillary services as those terms are defined in RCW 82.04.065;

    vi. The internet and internet access as those terms are defined in RCW 82.04.297;

    vii. The service described in RCW 82.04.050(6)(b);

    viii. Online educational programs provided by a:

(A) Public or private elementary or secondary school; or

(B) An institution of higher education as defined in sections 1001 or 1002 of the federal higher education act of 1965 (Title 20 U.S.C. Secs. 1001 and 1002), as existing on July 1, 2009. For purposes of this subsection (3)(b)(viii)(B), an online educational program must be encompassed within the institution's accreditation;

        ix. Travel agent services, including online travel services, and automated systems used by travel agents to book reservations;

    x.(A) A service that allows the person receiving the service to make online sales of products or services, digital or otherwise, using either: (I) The service provider's website; or (II) the service recipient's website, but only when the service provider's technology is used in creating or hosting the service recipient's website or is used in processing orders from customers using the service recipient's website.

(B) The service described in this subsection (3)(b)(x) does not include the underlying sale of the products or services, digital or otherwise, by the person receiving the service;

    xi. The mere storage of digital products, digital codes, computer software, or master copies of software. This exclusion from the definition of digital automated services includes providing space on a server for web hosting or the backing up of data or other information;

and

    xii. Digital goods.

4. "Digital books" means works that are generally recognized in the ordinary and usual sense as books.

5. "Digital code" means a code that provides a purchaser with the right to obtain one or more digital products, if all of the digital products to be obtained through the use of the code have the same sales and use tax treatment. "Digital code" does not include a code that represents a stored monetary value that is deducted from a total as it is used by the purchaser. "Digital code" also does not include a code that represents a redeemable card, gift card, or gift certificate that entitles the holder to select digital products of an indicated cash value. A digital code may be obtained by any means, including email or by tangible means regardless of its designation as song code, video code, book code, or some other term.

6. [Empty]

    a. "Digital goods," except as provided in (b) of this subsection (6), means sounds, images, data, facts, or information, or any combination thereof, transferred electronically, including, but not limited to, specified digital products and other products transferred electronically not included within the definition of specified digital products.

    b. The term "digital goods" does not include:

        i. Telecommunications services and ancillary services as those terms are defined in RCW 82.04.065;

        ii. Computer software as defined in RCW 82.04.215;

        iii. The internet and internet access as those terms are defined in RCW 82.04.297;

        iv.(A) Except as provided in (b)(iv)(B) of this subsection (6), the representation of a personal or professional service in electronic form, such as an electronic copy of an engineering report prepared by an engineer, where the service primarily involves the application of human effort by the service provider, and the human effort originated after the customer requested the service.

(B) The exclusion in (b)(iv)(A) of this subsection (6) does not apply to photographers in respect to amounts received for the taking of photographs that are transferred electronically to the customer, but only if the customer is an end user, as defined in RCW 82.04.190(11), of the photographs. Such amounts are considered to be for the sale of digital goods; and

    v. Services and activities excluded from the definition of digital automated services in subsection (3)(b)(i) through (xi) of this section and not otherwise described in (b)(i) through (iv) of this subsection (6).

7. "Digital products" means digital goods and digital automated services.

8. "Electronically transferred" or "transferred electronically" means obtained by the purchaser by means other than tangible storage media. It is not necessary that a copy of the product be physically transferred to the purchaser. So long as the purchaser may access the product, it will be considered to have been electronically transferred to the purchaser.

9. "Specified digital products" means electronically transferred digital audiovisual works, digital audio works, and digital books.

10. "Subscription radio services" means the sale of audio programming by a radio broadcaster as defined in RCW 82.08.0208, except as otherwise provided in this subsection. "Subscription radio services" does not include audio programming that is sold on a pay-per-program basis or that allows the buyer to access a library of programs at any time for a specific charge for that service.

11. "Subscription television services" means the sale of video programming by a television broadcaster as defined in RCW 82.08.0208, except as otherwise provided in this subsection. "Subscription television services" does not include video programming that is sold on a pay-per-program basis or that allows the buyer to access a library of programs at any time for a specific charge for that service, but only if the seller is not subject to a franchise fee in this state under the authority of Title 47 U.S.C. Sec. 542(a) on the gross revenue derived from the sale.

## Section 301
The definitions in this section apply throughout this chapter unless the context clearly requires otherwise.

1. "Actual price" means the total amount of consideration for which tobacco products are sold, valued in money, whether received in money or otherwise, including any charges by the seller necessary to complete the sale such as charges for delivery, freight, transportation, or handling.

2. "Affiliated" means related in any way by virtue of any form or amount of common ownership, control, operation, or management.

3. "Board" means the liquor and cannabis board.

4. "Business" means any trade, occupation, activity, or enterprise engaged in for the purpose of selling or distributing tobacco products in this state.

5. "Cigar" means a roll for smoking that is of any size or shape and that is made wholly or in part of tobacco, irrespective of whether the tobacco is pure or flavored, adulterated or mixed with any other ingredient, if the roll has a wrapper made wholly or in greater part of tobacco. "Cigar" does not include a cigarette.

6. "Cigarette" has the same meaning as in RCW 82.24.010.

7. "Department" means the department of revenue.

8. "Distributor" means (a) any person engaged in the business of selling tobacco products in this state who brings, or causes to be brought, into this state from without the state any tobacco products for sale, (b) any person who makes, manufactures, fabricates, or stores tobacco products in this state for sale in this state, (c) any person engaged in the business of selling tobacco products without this state who ships or transports tobacco products to retailers in this state, to be sold by those retailers, (d) any person engaged in the business of selling tobacco products in this state who handles for sale any tobacco products that are within this state but upon which tax has not been imposed.

9. "Indian country" means the same as defined in chapter 82.24 RCW.

10. "Little cigar" means a cigar that has a cellulose acetate integrated filter.

11. "Manufacturer" means a person who manufactures and sells tobacco products.

12. "Manufacturer's representative" means a person hired by a manufacturer to sell or distribute the manufacturer's tobacco products, and includes employees and independent contractors.

13. "Moist snuff" means tobacco, or a similar product containing nicotine, that is finely cut, ground, or powdered; is not for smoking; and is intended to be placed in the oral, but not the nasal, cavity.

14. "Person" means any individual, receiver, administrator, executor, assignee, trustee in bankruptcy, trust, estate, firm, copartnership, joint venture, club, company, joint stock company, business trust, municipal corporation, the state and its departments and institutions, political subdivision of the state of Washington, corporation, limited liability company, association, society, any group of individuals acting as a unit, whether mutual, cooperative, fraternal, nonprofit, or otherwise. The term excludes any person immune from state taxation, including the United States or its instrumentalities, and federally recognized Indian tribes and enrolled tribal members, conducting business within Indian country.

15. "Place of business" means any place where tobacco products are sold or where tobacco products are manufactured, stored, or kept for the purpose of sale, including any vessel, vehicle, airplane, train, or vending machine.

16. "Retail outlet" means each place of business from which tobacco products are sold to consumers.

17. "Retailer" means any person engaged in the business of selling tobacco products to ultimate consumers.

18. [Empty]

    a. "Sale" means any transfer, exchange, or barter, in any manner or by any means whatsoever, for a consideration, and includes and means all sales made by any person.

    b. The term "sale" includes a gift by a person engaged in the business of selling tobacco products, for advertising, promoting, or as a means of evading the provisions of this chapter.

19. [Empty]

    a. "Taxable sales price" means:

        i. In the case of a taxpayer that is not affiliated with the manufacturer, distributor, or other person from whom the taxpayer purchased tobacco products, the actual price for which the taxpayer purchased the tobacco products;

        ii. In the case of a taxpayer that purchases tobacco products from an affiliated manufacturer, affiliated distributor, or other affiliated person, and that sells those tobacco products to unaffiliated distributors, unaffiliated retailers, or ultimate consumers, the actual price for which that taxpayer sells those tobacco products to unaffiliated distributors, unaffiliated retailers, or ultimate consumers;

        iii. In the case of a taxpayer that sells tobacco products only to affiliated distributors or affiliated retailers, the price, determined as nearly as possible according to the actual price, that other distributors sell similar tobacco products of like quality and character to unaffiliated distributors, unaffiliated retailers, or ultimate consumers;

        iv. In the case of a taxpayer that is a manufacturer selling tobacco products directly to ultimate consumers, the actual price for which the taxpayer sells those tobacco products to ultimate consumers;

    v. In the case of a taxpayer that has acquired tobacco products under a sale as defined in subsection (18)(b) of this section, the price, determined as nearly as possible according to the actual price, that the taxpayer or other distributors sell the same tobacco products or similar tobacco products of like quality and character to unaffiliated distributors, unaffiliated retailers, or ultimate consumers; or

    vi. In any case where (a)(i) through (v) of this subsection do not apply, the price, determined as nearly as possible according to the actual price, that the taxpayer or other distributors sell the same tobacco products or similar tobacco products of like quality and character to unaffiliated distributors, unaffiliated retailers, or ultimate consumers.

    b. For purposes of (a)(i) and (ii) of this subsection only, "person" includes both persons as defined in subsection (14) of this section and any person immune from state taxation, including the United States or its instrumentalities, and federally recognized Indian tribes and enrolled tribal members, conducting business within Indian country.

    c. The department may adopt rules regarding the determination of taxable sales price under this subsection.

20. "Taxpayer" means a person liable for the tax imposed by this chapter.

21. "Tobacco products" means cigars, cheroots, stogies, periques, granulated, plug cut, crimp cut, ready rubbed, and other smoking tobacco, snuff, snuff flour, cavendish, plug and twist tobacco, fine-cut and other chewing tobaccos, shorts, refuse scraps, clippings, cuttings and sweepings of tobacco, and other kinds and forms of tobacco, prepared in such manner as to be suitable for chewing or smoking in a pipe or otherwise, or both for chewing and smoking, and any other product, regardless of form, that contains tobacco or nicotine, whether derived from tobacco or created synthetically, and is intended for human consumption or placement in the oral or nasal cavity or absorption into the human body by any other means, but does not include cigarettes as defined in RCW 82.24.010.

22. "Unaffiliated distributor" means a distributor that is not affiliated with the manufacturer, distributor, or other person from whom the distributor has purchased tobacco products.

23. "Unaffiliated retailer" means a retailer that is not affiliated with the manufacturer, distributor, or other person from whom the retailer has purchased tobacco products.

## Section 401
1. [Empty]

    a. Except as otherwise provided in this chapter , subsection (6) of this section, and (b) of this subsection, payments of the taxes imposed under chapters 82.04, 82.08, 82.12, 82.14, 82.16, and 82.27 RCW, along with reports and returns on forms prescribed by the department, are due monthly within 25 days after the end of the month in which the taxable activities occur.

    b. [Empty]

        i. Monthly filers with $3,000,000 or more taxable retail sales during calendar year 2026 must remit a prepayment on or before June 25, 2027, of the tax imposed under chapter 82.08 RCW equal to 80 percent of the amount of state sales tax collected by the taxpayer during the June 2026 reporting period.

        ii. The tax return and the remaining tax liability are due on or before July 26, 2027. The taxpayer must correct the collection amounts on the regularly filed excise tax return due on or before July 26, 2027.

2. The department of revenue may relieve any taxpayer or class of taxpayers from the obligation of remitting monthly and may require the return to cover other longer reporting periods, but in no event may returns be filed for a period greater than one year. Except as provided in subsection (3) of this section, for these taxpayers, tax payments are due on or before the last day of the month next succeeding the end of the period covered by the return.

3. For annual filers, tax payments, along with reports and returns on forms prescribed by the department, are due on or before April 15th of the year immediately following the end of the period covered by the return.

4. The department of revenue may also require verified annual returns from any taxpayer, setting forth such additional information as it may deem necessary to correctly determine tax liability.

5. Notwithstanding subsections (1) and (2) of this section, the department may relieve any person of the requirement to file returns if the following conditions are met:

    a. The person's value of products, gross proceeds of sales, or gross income of the business, from all business activities taxable under chapter 82.04 RCW, is less than $125,000 per year;

    b. The person's gross income of the business from all activities taxable under chapter 82.16 RCW is less than $24,000 per year; and

    c. The person is not required to collect or pay to the department of revenue any other tax or fee which the department is authorized to collect.

6. [Empty]

    a. Taxes imposed under chapter 82.08 or 82.12 RCW on taxable events that occur beginning January 1, 2019, through June 30, 2019, and payable by a consumer directly to the department are due, on returns prescribed by the department, by July 25, 2019.

    b. This subsection (6) does not apply to the reporting and payment of taxes imposed under chapters 82.08 and 82.12 RCW:

        i. On the retail sale or use of motor vehicles, vessels, or aircraft; or

        ii. By consumers who are engaged in business, unless the department has relieved the consumer of the requirement to file returns pursuant to subsection (5) of this section.

## Section 402
(1) If upon examination of any returns or from other information obtained by the department it appears that a tax or penalty has been paid less than that properly due, the department shall assess against the taxpayer such additional amount found to be due and shall add thereto interest on the tax only. The department shall notify the taxpayer by mail, or electronically as provided in RCW 82.32.135, of the additional amount and the additional amount shall become due and shall be paid within thirty 30 days from the date of the notice, or within such further time as the department may provide.

## Section 501
If any provision of this act or its application to any person or circumstance is held invalid, the remainder of the act or the application of the provision to other persons or circumstances is not affected.

## Section 502
This act is necessary for the support of the state government and its existing public institutions.

## Section 503
Sections 101 and 201 of this act take effect October 1, 2025.

## Section 504
Section 301 of this act takes effect January 1, 2026.

## Section 505
Sections 401 and 402 of this act take effect January 1, 2027.
