# 67.12 - Dancing, billiards, pool, and bowling.
* [67.12.021 - Licenses for public dances and public recreational or entertainment activities—Fees.](#6712021---licenses-for-public-dances-and-public-recreational-or-entertainment-activitiesfees)
* [67.12.110 - License required for rural pool halls, billiard halls, and bowling alleys.](#6712110---license-required-for-rural-pool-halls-billiard-halls-and-bowling-alleys)
## 67.12.021 - Licenses for public dances and public recreational or entertainment activities—Fees.
Counties are authorized to adopt ordinances to license and regulate public dances and other public recreational or entertainment activities in the unincorporated areas of the county whether or not held inside or outside of a building and whether or not admission charges are imposed.

License fees may be adequate to finance the costs of issuing the license and enforcing the regulations, including related law enforcement activities.

\[ [1987 c 250 § 1](http://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1987c250.pdf?cite=1987%20c%20250%20§%201); \]

## 67.12.110 - License required for rural pool halls, billiard halls, and bowling alleys.
The county legislative authority of each county in the state of Washington shall have sole and exclusive authority and power to regulate, restrain, license, or prohibit the maintenance or running of pool halls, billiard halls, and bowling alleys outside of the incorporated limits of each incorporated city, town, or village in their respective counties: PROVIDED, That the annual license fee for maintenance or running such pool halls, billiard halls, and bowling alleys shall be fixed in accordance with RCW 36.32.120(3), and which license fee shall be paid annually in advance to the appropriate county official: PROVIDED FURTHER, That nothing herein or elsewhere shall be so construed as to prevent the county legislative authority from revoking any license at any time prior to the expiration thereof for any cause by such county legislative authority deemed proper. And if said county legislative authority revokes said license it shall refund the unearned portion of such license.

\[ [1985 c 91 § 10](http://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1985c91.pdf?cite=1985%20c%2091%20§%2010); [1909 c 112 § 1](http://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1909c112.pdf?cite=1909%20c%20112%20§%201); RRS § 8289; \]

