# 43.15 - Office of lieutenant governor.
* [43.15.005 - Findings.](#4315005---findings)
* [43.15.010 - Duties.](#4315010---duties)
* [43.15.020 - President of the senate—Committee and board appointments and assignments.](#4315020---president-of-the-senatecommittee-and-board-appointments-and-assignments)
* [43.15.030 - Washington state leadership board—Created. (Effective until January 1, 2022.)](#4315030---washington-state-leadership-boardcreated-effective-until-january-1-2022)
* [43.15.040 - Use of state flag.](#4315040---use-of-state-flag)
* [43.15.050 - Legislative international trade account.](#4315050---legislative-international-trade-account)
* [43.15.060 - Legislative committee on economic development and international relations—Purpose—Created—Membership.](#4315060---legislative-committee-on-economic-development-and-international-relationspurposecreatedmembership)
* [43.15.065 - Legislative committee on economic development and international relations—Subcommittees—Rules of procedure.](#4315065---legislative-committee-on-economic-development-and-international-relationssubcommitteesrules-of-procedure)
* [43.15.070 - Legislative committee on economic development and international relations—Powers—Study and review of economic issues.](#4315070---legislative-committee-on-economic-development-and-international-relationspowersstudy-and-review-of-economic-issues)
* [43.15.075 - Legislative committee on economic development and international relations—Staff support.](#4315075---legislative-committee-on-economic-development-and-international-relationsstaff-support)
* [43.15.080 - Legislative committee on economic development and international relations—Travel expenses.](#4315080---legislative-committee-on-economic-development-and-international-relationstravel-expenses)
* [43.15.085 - Legislative committee on economic development and international relations—Expenses.](#4315085---legislative-committee-on-economic-development-and-international-relationsexpenses)
* [43.15.090 - Legislative committee on economic development and international relations—Cooperation with committees, agencies, and councils.](#4315090---legislative-committee-on-economic-development-and-international-relationscooperation-with-committees-agencies-and-councils)
* [43.15.095 - Legislative youth advisory council.](#4315095---legislative-youth-advisory-council)
* [43.15.100 - Sports mentoring program.](#4315100---sports-mentoring-program)
* [43.15.901 - Effective date—1985 c 467.](#4315901---effective-date1985-c-467)
## 43.15.005 - Findings.
The legislature finds that as the duties and responsibilities of the office of lieutenant governor have continued to incrementally increase, they have been distributed among various noncorresponding chapters in statute. The legislature further finds that by consolidating the duties and responsibilities of the office of lieutenant governor under one chapter, it keeps our statutes consistent among the different statewide elected offices and greater facilitates the understanding of the role of the office of lieutenant governor and its many statutorily defined duties and responsibilities.

\[ [2006 c 317 § 1](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/2005-06/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/Senate/6246-S.SL.pdf?cite=2006%20c%20317%20§%201); \]

## 43.15.010 - Duties.
The lieutenant governor has the following duties:

1. The lieutenant governor serves as president of the senate.

2. In addition to the events prescribed under the state Constitution, the lieutenant governor performs the duties of the governor when the governor is out of the state pursuant to RCW 43.06.040 and 43.06.050. When the lieutenant governor is called to perform the duties of the governor, he or she is compensated according to RCW 43.03.020.

3. When delegated to do so under RCW 41.72.030, the lieutenant governor shall award the law enforcement medal of honor during national law enforcement recognition week.

\[ [2006 c 317 § 3](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/2005-06/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/Senate/6246-S.SL.pdf?cite=2006%20c%20317%20§%203); \]

## 43.15.020 - President of the senate—Committee and board appointments and assignments.
The lieutenant governor serves as president of the senate and is responsible for making appointments to, and serving on, the committees and boards as set forth in this section.

1. The lieutenant governor serves on the following boards and committees:

    a. Capitol furnishings preservation committee, RCW 27.48.040;

    b. Washington higher education facilities authority, RCW 28B.07.030;

    c. Productivity board, also known as the employee involvement and recognition board, RCW 41.60.015;

    d. State finance committee, RCW 43.33.010;

    e. State capitol committee, RCW 43.34.010;

    f. Washington health care facilities authority, RCW 70.37.030;

    g. State medal of merit nominating committee, RCW 1.40.020;

    h. Medal of valor committee, RCW 1.60.020; and

    i. Washington state leadership board, RCW 43.15.030.

2. The lieutenant governor, and when serving as president of the senate, appoints members to the following boards and committees:

    a. Civil legal aid oversight committee, RCW 2.53.010;

    b. Office of public defense advisory committee, RCW 2.70.030;

    c. Washington state gambling commission, RCW 9.46.040;

    d. Sentencing guidelines commission, RCW 9.94A.860;

    e. State building code council, RCW 19.27.070;

    f. Financial education public-private partnership, RCW 28A.300.450;

    g. Joint administrative rules review committee, RCW 34.05.610;

    h. Capital projects advisory review board, RCW 39.10.220;

    i. Select committee on pension policy, RCW 41.04.276;

    j. Legislative ethics board, RCW 42.52.310;

    k. Washington citizens' commission on salaries, RCW 43.03.305;

    l. Legislative oral history committee, RCW 44.04.325;

    m. State council on aging, RCW 43.20A.685;

    n. State investment board, RCW 43.33A.020;

    o. Capitol campus design advisory committee, RCW 43.34.080;

    p. Washington state arts commission, RCW 43.46.015;

    q. PNWER-Net working subgroup under chapter 43.147 RCW;

    r. Community economic revitalization board, RCW 43.160.030;

    s. Washington economic development finance authority, RCW 43.163.020;

    t. Joint legislative audit and review committee, RCW 44.28.010;

    u. Joint committee on energy supply and energy conservation, RCW 44.39.015;

    v. Legislative evaluation and accountability program committee, RCW 44.48.010;

    w. Washington horse racing commission, RCW 67.16.014;

    x. Correctional industries board of directors, RCW 72.09.080;

    y. Joint committee on veterans' and military affairs, RCW 73.04.150;

    z. Joint legislative committee on water supply during drought, RCW 90.86.020; and

    aa. Statute law committee, RCW 1.08.001.

\[ [2020 c 114 § 5](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/2019-20/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/House/2402.SL.pdf?cite=2020%20c%20114%20§%205); [2017 3rd sp.s. c 6 § 814](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/2017-18/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/House/1661-S2.SL.pdf?cite=2017%203rd%20sp.s.%20c%206%20§%20814); [2015 c 225 § 61](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/2015-16/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/Senate/5024.SL.pdf?cite=2015%20c%20225%20§%2061); [2011 c 158 § 12](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/2011-12/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/House/1502-S.SL.pdf?cite=2011%20c%20158%20§%2012); [2010 1st sp.s. c 7 § 136](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/2009-10/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/House/2617-S2.SL.pdf?cite=2010%201st%20sp.s.%20c%207%20§%20136); [2010 1st sp.s. c 7 § 135](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/2009-10/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/House/2617-S2.SL.pdf?cite=2010%201st%20sp.s.%20c%207%20§%20135); [2010 c 271 § 704](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/2009-10/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/House/2658-S2.SL.pdf?cite=2010%20c%20271%20§%20704); [2009 c 560 § 27](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/2009-10/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/Senate/5995.SL.pdf?cite=2009%20c%20560%20§%2027); [2008 c 152 § 9](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/2007-08/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/House/3205-S2.SL.pdf?cite=2008%20c%20152%20§%209); [2006 c 317 § 4](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/2005-06/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/Senate/6246-S.SL.pdf?cite=2006%20c%20317%20§%204); \]

## **43.15.030 - Washington state leadership board—Created. (Effective until January 1, 2022.)**
1. The Washington state leadership board is organized as a private, nonprofit, nonpartisan corporation in accordance with chapter **24.-- RCW (the new chapter created in section 6101 of this act)** and this section.

2. The purpose of the Washington state leadership board is to:

    a. Provide the state a means of extending formal recognition for an individual's outstanding services to the state;

    b. Bring together those individuals to serve the state as ambassadors of trade, tourism, and international goodwill; and

    c. Expand educational, sports, leadership, and/or employment opportunities for youth, veterans, and people with disabilities in Washington state.

3. The Washington state leadership board may conduct activities in support of their mission.

4. The Washington state leadership board is governed by a board of directors. The board of directors is composed of the governor, the lieutenant governor, and the secretary of state, who serve as ex officio, nonvoting members, and other officers and members as the Washington state leadership board designates. In addition, four legislators may be appointed to the board of directors as ex officio members in the following manner: One legislator from each of the two largest caucuses of the senate, appointed by the president of the senate, and one legislator from each of the two largest caucuses of the house of representatives, appointed by the speaker of the house of representatives.

5. The board of directors shall adopt bylaws and establish governance and transparency policies.

6. The lieutenant governor's office may provide technical and financial assistance for the Washington state leadership board, where the work of the board aligns with the mission of the office. Assistance from the lieutenant governor's office may include, but is not limited to:

    a. Collaboration with the Washington state leadership board on the Washington world fellows program, a college readiness and study abroad fellowship administered by the office of the lieutenant governor;

    b. Beginning January 1, 2019, collaboration with the Washington state leadership board to administer the sports mentoring program as established under RCW 43.15.100, a mentoring program to encourage underserved youth to join sports or otherwise participate in the area of sports. If approved by the board, boundless Washington, an outdoor leadership program for young people with disabilities, shall satisfy the terms of the sports mentoring program; and

    c. The compilation of a yearly financial report, which shall be made available to the legislature no later than January 15th of each year, detailing all revenues and expenditures associated with the Washington world fellows program and the sports mentoring program. Any expenditures made by the Washington state leadership board in support of the Washington world fellows program and the sports mentoring program shall be made available to the office of the lieutenant governor for the purpose of inclusion in the annual financial report.

7. The legislature may make appropriations in support of the Washington state leadership board subject to the availability of funds.

8. The office of the lieutenant governor must post on its web site detailed information on all funds received by the Washington state leadership board and all expenditures by the Washington state leadership board.

## 43.15.040 - Use of state flag.
The Washington state leadership board may use the image of the Washington state flag to promote the mission of the organization as set forth under RCW 43.15.030. The board retains any revenue generated by the use of the image, when the usage is consistent with the purposes under RCW 43.15.030.

\[ [2020 c 114 § 19](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/2019-20/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/House/2402.SL.pdf?cite=2020%20c%20114%20§%2019); [2005 c 69 § 2](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/2005-06/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/Senate/5862-S.SL.pdf?cite=2005%20c%2069%20§%202); \]

## 43.15.050 - Legislative international trade account.
The legislative international trade account is created in the custody of the state treasurer. All moneys received by the president of the senate and the secretary of state from gifts, grants, and endowments for international trade hosting, international relations, and international missions activities must be deposited in the account. Only private, nonpublic gifts, grants, and endowments may be deposited in the account. A person, as defined in RCW 42.52.010, may not donate, gift, grant, or endow more than five thousand dollars per calendar year to the legislative international trade account. Expenditures from the account may be used only for the purposes of international trade hosting, international relations, and international trade mission activities, excluding travel and lodging, in which the president and members of the senate, members of the house of representatives, and the secretary of state participate in an official capacity. An appropriation is not required for expenditures. All requests by individual legislators for use of funds from this account must be first approved by the secretary of the senate for members of the senate or the chief clerk of the house of representatives for members of the house of representatives. All expenditures from the account shall be authorized by the final signed approval of the chief clerk of the house of representatives, the secretary of the senate, and the president of the senate.

\[ [2003 c 265 § 1](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/2003-04/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/Senate/5178-S.SL.pdf?cite=2003%20c%20265%20§%201); \]

## 43.15.060 - Legislative committee on economic development and international relations—Purpose—Created—Membership.
1. Economic development and in particular international trade, tourism, and investment have become increasingly important to Washington, affecting the state's employment, revenues, and general economic well-being. Additionally, economic trends are rapidly changing and the international marketplace has become increasingly competitive as states and countries seek to improve and safeguard their own economic well-being. The purpose of the legislative committee on economic development and international relations is to provide responsive and consistent involvement by the legislature in economic development to maintain a healthy state economy and to provide employment opportunities to Washington residents.

2. There is created a legislative committee on economic development and international relations which shall consist of six senators and six representatives from the legislature and the lieutenant governor who shall serve as chairperson. The senate members of the committee shall be appointed by the president of the senate and the house members of the committee shall be appointed by the speaker of the house. Not more than three members from each house shall be from the same political party. Vacancies occurring shall be filled by the appointing authority.

\[ [2020 c 114 § 20](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/2019-20/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/House/2402.SL.pdf?cite=2020%20c%20114%20§%2020); [2003 c 347 § 1](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/2003-04/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/House/1179.SL.pdf?cite=2003%20c%20347%20§%201); [1985 c 467 § 17](http://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1985c467.pdf?cite=1985%20c%20467%20§%2017); \]

## 43.15.065 - Legislative committee on economic development and international relations—Subcommittees—Rules of procedure.
The committee shall by majority vote establish subcommittees, and prescribe rules of procedure for itself and its subcommittees which are consistent with this chapter.

\[ [2020 c 114 § 21](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/2019-20/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/House/2402.SL.pdf?cite=2020%20c%20114%20§%2021); [1985 c 467 § 18](http://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1985c467.pdf?cite=1985%20c%20467%20§%2018); \]

## 43.15.070 - Legislative committee on economic development and international relations—Powers—Study and review of economic issues.
The committee or its subcommittees are authorized to study and review economic development issues with special emphasis on international trade, tourism, investment, and industrial development, and to assist the legislature in developing a comprehensive and consistent economic development policy. The issues under review by the committee shall include, but not be limited to:

1. Evaluating existing state policies, laws, and programs which promote or affect economic development with special emphasis on those concerning international trade, tourism, and investment and determine their cost-effectiveness and level of cooperation with other public and private agencies;

2. Monitoring economic trends, and developing for review by the legislature such state responses as may be deemed effective and appropriate;

3. Monitoring economic development policies and programs of other states and nations and evaluating their effectiveness;

4. Determining the economic impact of international trade, tourism, and investment upon the state's economy;

5. Assessing the need for and effect of federal, regional, and state cooperation in economic development policies and programs;

6. Evaluating opportunities to collaborate with public and private agencies in achieving Washington state's international relations objectives;

7. Studying and adopting any state tourism slogan or tagline recommended by the Washington tourism marketing authority established in RCW 43.384.020;

8. Designating official legislative trade delegations and nominating legislators for inclusion in official trade delegations organized by the office of international relations and protocol;

9. Proposing potential sister-state relationships to be submitted to the governor for approval; and

10. Developing and evaluating legislative proposals concerning the issues specified in this section.

\[ [2020 c 114 § 22](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/2019-20/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/House/2402.SL.pdf?cite=2020%20c%20114%20§%2022); [1985 c 467 § 19](http://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1985c467.pdf?cite=1985%20c%20467%20§%2019); \]

## 43.15.075 - Legislative committee on economic development and international relations—Staff support.
The committee shall receive the necessary staff support from both the senate and house staff resources.

\[ [1985 c 467 § 20](http://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1985c467.pdf?cite=1985%20c%20467%20§%2020); \]

## 43.15.080 - Legislative committee on economic development and international relations—Travel expenses.
The members of the committee shall serve without additional compensation, but shall be reimbursed for their travel expenses, in accordance with RCW 44.04.120, incurred while attending sessions of the committee or meetings of any subcommittee of the committee, while engaged on other committee business authorized by the committee, and while going to and coming from committee sessions or committee meetings.

\[ [1985 c 467 § 21](http://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1985c467.pdf?cite=1985%20c%20467%20§%2021); \]

## 43.15.085 - Legislative committee on economic development and international relations—Expenses.
All expenses incurred by the committee, including salaries and expenses of employees, shall be paid upon voucher forms as provided by the auditor and signed by the chairperson or vice chairperson of the committee and attested by the secretary of the committee, and the authority of the chairperson and secretary to sign vouchers shall continue until their successors are selected after each ensuing session of the legislature. Vouchers may be drawn on funds appropriated generally by the legislature for legislative expenses or upon any special appropriation which may be provided by the legislature for the expenses of the committee or both.

\[ [1985 c 467 § 22](http://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1985c467.pdf?cite=1985%20c%20467%20§%2022); \]

## 43.15.090 - Legislative committee on economic development and international relations—Cooperation with committees, agencies, and councils.
The committee shall cooperate, act, and function with legislative committees, executive agencies, and with the councils or committees of other states similar to this committee and with other interstate research organizations.

\[ [1985 c 467 § 23](http://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1985c467.pdf?cite=1985%20c%20467%20§%2023); \]

## 43.15.095 - Legislative youth advisory council.
1. The legislative youth advisory council is established to examine issues of importance to youth, including but not limited to education, employment, strategies to increase youth participation in state and municipal government, safe environments for youth, substance abuse, emotional and physical health, foster care, poverty, homelessness, and youth access to services on a statewide and municipal basis.

2. The council consists of at least twenty-two members as provided in this subsection who, at the time of appointment, are aged fourteen to eighteen. The council shall select a chair from among its members.

3. Members shall serve two-year terms and, if eligible, may be reappointed for subsequent two-year terms.

4. [Empty]
    a. Students may apply annually to be considered for participation in the program by completing an online application form and submitting the application to the legislative youth advisory council. The council may develop selection criteria and an application review process. The council shall recommend candidates whose names will be submitted to the office of the lieutenant governor for final selection. The office of the lieutenant governor shall notify all applicants of the final selections.

    b. The office of the lieutenant governor shall make the application available on the lieutenant governor's website.

5. Subject to the supervision of the office of the lieutenant governor, the council shall have the following duties:

    a. Advising the legislature on proposed and pending legislation, including state budget expenditures and policy matters relating to youth;

    b. Advising the standing committees of the legislature and study commissions, committees, and task forces regarding issues relating to youth;

    c. Conducting periodic seminars for its members regarding leadership, government, and the legislature;

    d. Accepting and soliciting for grants and donations from public and private sources to support the activities of the council; and

    e. Reporting annually by December 1st to the legislature on its activities, including proposed legislation that implements recommendations of the council.

6. In carrying out its duties under this section, the council must meet at least three times per year. The council is encouraged to use technology, such as remote videoconferencing technology, to facilitate members' participation in meetings. The council is encouraged to invite local state legislators to participate in the meetings. The council is encouraged to poll other students in order to get a broad perspective on various policy issues. The council is encouraged to use technology to conduct polling.

7. Members may be reimbursed as provided in RCW 43.03.050 and 43.03.060.

8. The office of the lieutenant governor shall provide administration, supervision, and facilitation support to the council. In facilitating the program, the office of the lieutenant governor may collaborate with the Washington state leadership board established in RCW 43.15.030. The senate and house of representatives may provide policy and fiscal briefings and assistance with drafting proposed legislation. The senate and the house of representatives shall each develop internal policies relating to staff assistance provided to the council. Such policies may include applicable internal personnel and practices guidelines, resource use and expense reimbursement guidelines, and applicable ethics mandates. Provision of funds, resources, and staff, as well as the assignment and direction of staff, remains at all times within the sole discretion of the chamber making the provision.

9. The office of the lieutenant governor, the legislature, any agency of the legislature, and any official or employee of such office or agency are immune from liability for any injury that is incurred by or caused by a member of the legislative youth advisory council and that occurs while the member of the council is performing duties of the council or is otherwise engaged in activities or receiving services for which reimbursement is allowed under subsection (7) of this section. The immunity provided by this subsection does not apply to an injury intentionally caused by the act or omission of an employee or official of the office of the lieutenant governor, the legislature, or any agency of the legislature.

\[ [2020 c 114 § 23](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/2019-20/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/House/2402.SL.pdf?cite=2020%20c%20114%20§%2023); [2009 c 410 § 1](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/2009-10/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/Senate/5229-S.SL.pdf?cite=2009%20c%20410%20§%201); [2007 c 291 § 2](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/2007-08/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/House/1052-S.SL.pdf?cite=2007%20c%20291%20§%202); [2005 c 355 § 1](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/2005-06/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/Senate/5254.SL.pdf?cite=2005%20c%20355%20§%201); \]

## 43.15.100 - Sports mentoring program.
1. The sports mentoring program is established to enable eligible nonprofit community-based organizations to provide opportunities for underserved youth to join sports teams or otherwise participate in the area of sports. The goal of the program is to support youth in building self-confidence, developing skills in the areas of goal setting and collaboration, and promoting a healthy lifestyle through forming positive relationships with peers and family, avoiding risky or delinquent behavior, and achieving educational success. Proceeds from the Seattle Mariners special license plate, issued under RCW 46.18.200, must be deposited into the Seattle Mariners account in accordance with RCW 46.68.420. Funds in the account may only be used, except as provided under RCW 46.68.420(6), for grants to support youth to stay in school, participate in sports, and receive mentorships.

2. The office of lieutenant governor will collaborate with the *association of Washington generals to issue competitive grants to eligible organizations. The following criteria must be used to prioritize applications:

    a. Services provided by the organization to program participants are provided without a fee;

    b. Eligible organizations must assist children with enrolling in sports through their parents, guardians, or coach; and

    c. Eligible organizations must provide professional staff support to the mentor, child, and parent.

3. Eligible organizations must meet the following requirements:

    a. Be a 501(c)(3) nonprofit organization;

    b. Conduct national criminal background checks for all employees and volunteer mentors who work with children;

    c. Have adopted standards for care including staff training, health and safety standards, and mechanisms for assessing and enforcing the program's compliance with the standards adopted;

    d. Ensure that sixty percent or more of the children they serve are eligible for free or reduced-price lunch;

    e. Provide free, direct services to children through volunteer mentoring; and

    f. Provide professional oversight of all mentoring relationships for each child served.

\[ [2018 c 67 § 3](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/2017-18/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/Senate/5746-S.SL.pdf?cite=2018%20c%2067%20§%203); \]

## 43.15.901 - Effective date—1985 c 467.
This act is necessary for the immediate preservation of the public peace, health, and safety, the support of the state government and its existing public institutions, and shall take effect July 1, 1985.

\[ [1985 c 467 § 26](http://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1985c467.pdf?cite=1985%20c%20467%20§%2026); \]

