# 43.20A - Department of social and health services.
* [43.20A.005 - Intent—Public involvement and outreach.](#4320a005---intentpublic-involvement-and-outreach)
* [43.20A.010 - Purpose.](#4320a010---purpose)
* [43.20A.020 - Definitions.](#4320a020---definitions)
* [43.20A.030 - Department created—Powers and duties transferred to.](#4320a030---department-createdpowers-and-duties-transferred-to)
* [43.20A.035 - Inventory of charitable, educational, penal, and reformatory land.](#4320a035---inventory-of-charitable-educational-penal-and-reformatory-land)
* [43.20A.037 - Affordable housing—Inventory of suitable housing.](#4320a037---affordable-housinginventory-of-suitable-housing)
* [43.20A.040 - Secretary of social and health services—Appointment—Term—Salary—Temporary appointment if vacancy—As executive head and appointing authority.](#4320a040---secretary-of-social-and-health-servicesappointmenttermsalarytemporary-appointment-if-vacancyas-executive-head-and-appointing-authority)
* [43.20A.050 - Secretary of social and health services—Powers and duties generally—Employment of assistants and personnel, limitation.](#4320a050---secretary-of-social-and-health-servicespowers-and-duties-generallyemployment-of-assistants-and-personnel-limitation)
* [43.20A.060 - Departmental divisions—Plan establishing and organizing.](#4320a060---departmental-divisionsplan-establishing-and-organizing)
* [43.20A.073 - Rule making regarding sex offenders.](#4320a073---rule-making-regarding-sex-offenders)
* [43.20A.075 - Rule-making authority.](#4320a075---rule-making-authority)
* [43.20A.080 - Data sharing—Confidentiality—Penalties.](#4320a080---data-sharingconfidentialitypenalties)
* [43.20A.090 - Deputy secretary—Department personnel director—Assistant secretaries—Appointment—Duties—Salaries.](#4320a090---deputy-secretarydepartment-personnel-directorassistant-secretariesappointmentdutiessalaries)
* [43.20A.105 - Social worker V employees—Implementation plan.](#4320a105---social-worker-v-employeesimplementation-plan)
* [43.20A.110 - Secretary's delegation of powers and duties.](#4320a110---secretarys-delegation-of-powers-and-duties)
* [43.20A.130 - Secretary or designee as member of state board of health.](#4320a130---secretary-or-designee-as-member-of-state-board-of-health)
* [43.20A.167 - Federal Older Americans Act of 1965—Department to participate in and administer.](#4320a167---federal-older-americans-act-of-1965department-to-participate-in-and-administer)
* [43.20A.168 - Community programs and projects for the aging.](#4320a168---community-programs-and-projects-for-the-aging)
* [43.20A.205 - Denial, suspension, revocation, or modification of license.](#4320a205---denial-suspension-revocation-or-modification-of-license)
* [43.20A.215 - Assessment of civil fine.](#4320a215---assessment-of-civil-fine)
* [43.20A.300 - Department as state agency for receipt of federal funds for vocational rehabilitation—Exception.](#4320a300---department-as-state-agency-for-receipt-of-federal-funds-for-vocational-rehabilitationexception)
* [43.20A.310 - Vocational rehabilitation, powers and duties of secretary or designee.](#4320a310---vocational-rehabilitation-powers-and-duties-of-secretary-or-designee)
* [43.20A.320 - Consultation with coordinating council for occupational education.](#4320a320---consultation-with-coordinating-council-for-occupational-education)
* [43.20A.350 - Committees and councils—Declaration of purpose.](#4320a350---committees-and-councilsdeclaration-of-purpose)
* [43.20A.360 - Committees and councils—Appointment—Memberships—Terms—Vacancies—Travel expenses.](#4320a360---committees-and-councilsappointmentmembershipstermsvacanciestravel-expenses)
* [43.20A.390 - Per diem or mileage—Limitation.](#4320a390---per-diem-or-mileagelimitation)
* [43.20A.400 - Purchase of services from public or nonprofit agencies—Utilization of nonappropriated funds.](#4320a400---purchase-of-services-from-public-or-nonprofit-agenciesutilization-of-nonappropriated-funds)
* [43.20A.405 - Purchase of services from public or nonprofit agencies—Vendor rates—Establishment.](#4320a405---purchase-of-services-from-public-or-nonprofit-agenciesvendor-ratesestablishment)
* [43.20A.410 - Purchase of services from public or nonprofit agencies—Factors to be considered.](#4320a410---purchase-of-services-from-public-or-nonprofit-agenciesfactors-to-be-considered)
* [43.20A.415 - Purchase of services from public or nonprofit agencies—Retention of basic responsibilities by secretary.](#4320a415---purchase-of-services-from-public-or-nonprofit-agenciesretention-of-basic-responsibilities-by-secretary)
* [43.20A.420 - Purchase of services from public or nonprofit agencies—Secretary to provide consultative, technical and development services to suppliers—Review of services.](#4320a420---purchase-of-services-from-public-or-nonprofit-agenciessecretary-to-provide-consultative-technical-and-development-services-to-suppliersreview-of-services)
* [43.20A.425 - Purchase of services from public or nonprofit agencies—Qualifications of vendors.](#4320a425---purchase-of-services-from-public-or-nonprofit-agenciesqualifications-of-vendors)
* [43.20A.430 - Purchase of services from public or nonprofit agencies—Retention of sums to pay departmental costs.](#4320a430---purchase-of-services-from-public-or-nonprofit-agenciesretention-of-sums-to-pay-departmental-costs)
* [43.20A.445 - State-operated workshops at institutions—Authorized—Standards.](#4320a445---state-operated-workshops-at-institutionsauthorizedstandards)
* [43.20A.465 - Contracted service providers—Disruption or delay by economic or industrial actions.](#4320a465---contracted-service-providersdisruption-or-delay-by-economic-or-industrial-actions)
* [43.20A.550 - Federal programs—Rules and regulations—Internal reorganization to meet federal requirements—Statutes to be construed to meet federal law—Conflicting parts deemed inoperative.](#4320a550---federal-programsrules-and-regulationsinternal-reorganization-to-meet-federal-requirementsstatutes-to-be-construed-to-meet-federal-lawconflicting-parts-deemed-inoperative)
* [43.20A.605 - Authority to administer oaths and issue subpoenas—Provisions governing subpoenas.](#4320a605---authority-to-administer-oaths-and-issue-subpoenasprovisions-governing-subpoenas)
* [43.20A.607 - Authority to appoint a single executive officer for multiple institutions—Exception.](#4320a607---authority-to-appoint-a-single-executive-officer-for-multiple-institutionsexception)
* [43.20A.610 - Employment of deputies, experts, physicians, etc.](#4320a610---employment-of-deputies-experts-physicians-etc)
* [43.20A.635 - Services for children with disabilities.](#4320a635---services-for-children-with-disabilities)
* [43.20A.660 - Reports of violations by secretary—Duty of attorney general, prosecuting attorney or city attorney to institute proceedings—Notice to alleged violator.](#4320a660---reports-of-violations-by-secretaryduty-of-attorney-general-prosecuting-attorney-or-city-attorney-to-institute-proceedingsnotice-to-alleged-violator)
* [43.20A.675 - Office of the deaf and hard of hearing—Educational materials.](#4320a675---office-of-the-deaf-and-hard-of-hearingeducational-materials)
* [43.20A.680 - State council on aging established.](#4320a680---state-council-on-aging-established)
* [43.20A.685 - State council on aging—Membership—Terms—Vacancies—Chairperson—Secretary—Compensation of legislative members.](#4320a685---state-council-on-agingmembershiptermsvacancieschairpersonsecretarycompensation-of-legislative-members)
* [43.20A.690 - State council on aging—Meetings—Compensation of nonlegislative members.](#4320a690---state-council-on-agingmeetingscompensation-of-nonlegislative-members)
* [43.20A.695 - State council on aging—Powers and duties—Bylaws.](#4320a695---state-council-on-agingpowers-and-dutiesbylaws)
* [43.20A.710 - Investigation of conviction records or pending charges of state employees and individual providers.](#4320a710---investigation-of-conviction-records-or-pending-charges-of-state-employees-and-individual-providers)
* [43.20A.711 - Receipt and use of criminal history information.](#4320a711---receipt-and-use-of-criminal-history-information)
* [43.20A.715 - Long-term care worker screening—Limitations on disqualification.](#4320a715---long-term-care-worker-screeninglimitations-on-disqualification)
* [43.20A.720 - Telecommunications devices and services for the hearing and speech impaired—Definitions.](#4320a720---telecommunications-devices-and-services-for-the-hearing-and-speech-impaireddefinitions)
* [43.20A.725 - Telecommunications devices for the hearing and speech impaired—Program for provision of services and equipment—Rules.](#4320a725---telecommunications-devices-for-the-hearing-and-speech-impairedprogram-for-provision-of-services-and-equipmentrules)
* [43.20A.735 - Domestic violence perpetrator programs. (Effective July 1, 2022.)](#4320a735---domestic-violence-perpetrator-programs-effective-july-1-2022)
* [43.20A.760 - Community and technical college students' eligibility for the Washington basic food program.](#4320a760---community-and-technical-college-students-eligibility-for-the-washington-basic-food-program)
* [43.20A.765 - Mental health first aid training for teachers and educational staff.](#4320a765---mental-health-first-aid-training-for-teachers-and-educational-staff)
* [43.20A.770 - Administration of statutes applicable to runaway youth, at-risk youth, and families in conflict—Consistency required.](#4320a770---administration-of-statutes-applicable-to-runaway-youth-at-risk-youth-and-families-in-conflictconsistency-required)
* [43.20A.790 - Homeless families with children—Shelter and housing services.](#4320a790---homeless-families-with-childrenshelter-and-housing-services)
* [43.20A.800 - Vision services for the homeless—Coordination.](#4320a800---vision-services-for-the-homelesscoordination)
* [43.20A.810 - Vision services for the homeless—Funding.](#4320a810---vision-services-for-the-homelessfunding)
* [43.20A.820 - Vision services for the homeless—Use of used eyeglass frames by providers.](#4320a820---vision-services-for-the-homelessuse-of-used-eyeglass-frames-by-providers)
* [43.20A.830 - Vision services for the homeless—Provider liability.](#4320a830---vision-services-for-the-homelessprovider-liability)
* [43.20A.840 - Vision services for the homeless—Third party payers.](#4320a840---vision-services-for-the-homelessthird-party-payers)
* [43.20A.845 - Vision services for the homeless—Program name.](#4320a845---vision-services-for-the-homelessprogram-name)
* [43.20A.865 - Secretary to enter into agreements with health care authority—Division of responsibilities.](#4320a865---secretary-to-enter-into-agreements-with-health-care-authoritydivision-of-responsibilities)
* [43.20A.875 - Employee incentive program pilot—WorkFirst program.](#4320a875---employee-incentive-program-pilotworkfirst-program)
* [43.20A.880 - Training competencies and learning outcomes.](#4320a880---training-competencies-and-learning-outcomes)
* [43.20A.930 - Effective date—Severability—1970 ex.s. c 18.](#4320a930---effective-dateseverability1970-exs-c-18)
## 43.20A.005 - Intent—Public involvement and outreach.
It is the intent of the legislature that the department of social and health services and the department of ecology, in consultation with affected constituent groups, continue appropriate public involvement and outreach mechanisms designed to provide cost-effective public input on their programs and policies.

\[ [2001 c 291 § 1001](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/2001-02/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/Senate/5401-S.SL.pdf?cite=2001%20c%20291%20§%201001); \]

## 43.20A.010 - Purpose.
The department of social and health services is designed to integrate and coordinate all those activities involving provision of care for individuals who, as a result of their economic, social or health condition, require financial assistance, institutional care, rehabilitation or other social and health services. In order to provide for maximum efficiency of operation consistent with meeting the needs of those served or affected, the department will encompass substantially all of the powers, duties and functions vested by law on June 30, 1970, in the department of public assistance, the department of institutions, the veterans' rehabilitation council and the division of vocational rehabilitation of the coordinating council on occupational education. The department will concern itself with changing social needs, and will expedite the development and implementation of programs designed to achieve its goals. In furtherance of this policy, it is the legislative intent to set forth only the broad outline of the structure of the department, leaving specific details of its internal organization and management to those charged with its administration.

\[ [1989 1st ex.s. c 9 § 211](http://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1989ex1c9.pdf?cite=1989%201st%20ex.s.%20c%209%20§%20211); [1979 c 141 § 60](http://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1979c141.pdf?cite=1979%20c%20141%20§%2060); [1970 ex.s. c 18 § 1](http://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1970ex1c18.pdf?cite=1970%20ex.s.%20c%2018%20§%201); \]

## 43.20A.020 - Definitions.
As used in this chapter, unless the context indicates otherwise:

1. "Department" means the department of social and health services.

2. "Secretary" means the secretary of the department of social and health services.

3. "Deputy secretary" means the deputy secretary of the department of social and health services.

4. "Overpayment" means any department payment or department benefit to a recipient or to a vendor in excess of that to which the recipient or vendor is entitled by law, rule, or contract, including amounts in dispute pending resolution.

5. "Vendor" means an entity that provides goods or services to or for clientele of the department and that controls operational decisions.

\[ [1987 c 283 § 1](http://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1987c283.pdf?cite=1987%20c%20283%20§%201); [1979 c 141 § 61](http://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1979c141.pdf?cite=1979%20c%20141%20§%2061); [1970 ex.s. c 18 § 2](http://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1970ex1c18.pdf?cite=1970%20ex.s.%20c%2018%20§%202); \]

## 43.20A.030 - Department created—Powers and duties transferred to.
There is hereby created a department of state government to be known as the department of social and health services. All powers, duties and functions vested by law on June 30, 1970, in the department of public assistance, the department of institutions, the veterans' rehabilitation council, and the division of vocational rehabilitation of the coordinating council on occupational education are transferred to the department. Powers, duties and functions to be transferred shall include, but not be limited to, all those powers, duties and functions involving cooperation with other governmental units, such as cities and counties, or with the federal government, in particular those concerned with participation in federal grants-in-aid programs.

\[ [1989 1st ex.s. c 9 § 212](http://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1989ex1c9.pdf?cite=1989%201st%20ex.s.%20c%209%20§%20212); [1979 c 141 § 62](http://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1979c141.pdf?cite=1979%20c%20141%20§%2062); [1970 ex.s. c 18 § 3](http://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1970ex1c18.pdf?cite=1970%20ex.s.%20c%2018%20§%203); \]

## 43.20A.035 - Inventory of charitable, educational, penal, and reformatory land.
The department shall conduct an inventory of real properties as provided in *RCW 79.01.006.

\[ [1991 c 204 § 2](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/1991-92/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/Senate/5332-S.SL.pdf?cite=1991%20c%20204%20§%202); \]

## 43.20A.037 - Affordable housing—Inventory of suitable housing.
1. The department shall identify and catalog real property that is no longer required for department purposes and is suitable for the development of affordable housing for very low-income, and moderate-income households as defined in RCW 43.63A.510. The inventory shall include the location, approximate size, and current zoning classification of the property. The department shall provide a copy of the inventory to the *department of community, trade, and economic development by November 1, 1993, and every November 1 thereafter.

2. By November 1 of each year, beginning in 1994, the department shall purge the inventory of real property of sites that are no longer available for the development of affordable housing. The department shall include an updated listing of real property that has become available since the last update. As used in this section, "real property" means buildings, land, or buildings and land.

\[ [1995 c 399 § 65](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/1995-96/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/House/1014.SL.pdf?cite=1995%20c%20399%20§%2065); [1993 c 461 § 8](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/1993-94/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/House/1824.SL.pdf?cite=1993%20c%20461%20§%208); \]

## 43.20A.040 - Secretary of social and health services—Appointment—Term—Salary—Temporary appointment if vacancy—As executive head and appointing authority.
The executive head and appointing authority of the department shall be the secretary of social and health services. He or she shall be appointed by the governor with the consent of the senate, and shall serve at the pleasure of the governor. He or she shall be paid a salary to be fixed by the governor in accordance with the provisions of RCW 43.03.040. If a vacancy occurs in his or her position while the senate is not in session, the governor shall make a temporary appointment until the next meeting of the senate, when he or she shall present to that body his or her nomination for the office.

\[ [2009 c 549 § 5073](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/2009-10/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/Senate/5038.SL.pdf?cite=2009%20c%20549%20§%205073); [1970 ex.s. c 18 § 4](http://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1970ex1c18.pdf?cite=1970%20ex.s.%20c%2018%20§%204); \]

## 43.20A.050 - Secretary of social and health services—Powers and duties generally—Employment of assistants and personnel, limitation.
It is the intent of the legislature wherever possible to place the internal affairs of the department under the control of the secretary to institute the flexible, alert and intelligent management of its business that changing contemporary circumstances require. Therefore, whenever the secretary's authority is not specifically limited by law, he or she shall have complete charge and supervisory powers over the department. The secretary is authorized to create such administrative structures as deemed appropriate, except as otherwise specified by law. The secretary shall have the power to employ such assistants and personnel as may be necessary for the general administration of the department. Except as elsewhere specified, such employment shall be in accordance with the rules of the state civil service law, chapter 41.06 RCW.

\[ [1997 c 386 § 41](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/1997-98/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/Senate/5710-S2.SL.pdf?cite=1997%20c%20386%20§%2041); [1979 c 141 § 63](http://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1979c141.pdf?cite=1979%20c%20141%20§%2063); [1970 ex.s. c 18 § 5](http://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1970ex1c18.pdf?cite=1970%20ex.s.%20c%2018%20§%205); \]

## 43.20A.060 - Departmental divisions—Plan establishing and organizing.
The department of social and health services shall be subdivided into divisions, including a division of vocational rehabilitation. Except as otherwise specified or as federal requirements may differently require, these divisions shall be established and organized in accordance with plans to be prepared by the secretary and approved by the governor. In preparing such plans, the secretary shall endeavor to promote efficient public management, to improve programs, and to take full advantage of the economies, both fiscal and administrative, to be gained from the consolidation of the departments of public assistance, institutions, the veterans' rehabilitation council, and the division of vocational rehabilitation of the coordinating council on occupational education.

\[ [1989 1st ex.s. c 9 § 213](http://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1989ex1c9.pdf?cite=1989%201st%20ex.s.%20c%209%20§%20213); [1979 c 141 § 64](http://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1979c141.pdf?cite=1979%20c%20141%20§%2064); [1970 ex.s. c 18 § 6](http://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1970ex1c18.pdf?cite=1970%20ex.s.%20c%2018%20§%206); \]

## 43.20A.073 - Rule making regarding sex offenders.
See RCW 72.09.337.

\[ \]

## 43.20A.075 - Rule-making authority.
For rules adopted after July 23, 1995, the secretary may not rely solely on a section of law stating a statute's intent or purpose, on the enabling provisions of the statute establishing the agency, or on any combination of such provisions, for statutory authority to adopt any rule.

\[ [1995 c 403 § 102](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/1995-96/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/House/1010-S.SL.pdf?cite=1995%20c%20403%20§%20102); \]

## 43.20A.080 - Data sharing—Confidentiality—Penalties.
1. The department shall provide the employment security department quarterly with the names and social security numbers of all clients in the WorkFirst program and any successor state welfare program.

2. The information provided by the employment security department under RCW 50.13.060 for statistical analysis and welfare program evaluation purposes may be used only for statistical analysis, research, and evaluation purposes as provided in RCW 74.08A.410 and 74.08A.420. Through individual matches with accessed employment security department confidential employer wage files, only aggregate, statistical, group level data shall be reported. Data sharing by the employment security department may be extended to include the office of financial management and other such governmental entities with oversight responsibility for this program.

3. The department and other agencies of state government shall protect the privacy of confidential personal data supplied under RCW 50.13.060 consistent with federal law, chapters 50.13 and 50A.25 RCW, and the terms and conditions of a formal data-sharing agreement between the employment security department and agencies of state government, however the misuse or unauthorized use of confidential data supplied by the employment security department is subject to the penalties in RCW 50.13.080 and 50A.25.120.

\[ [2019 c 13 § 67](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/2019-20/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/House/1399-S.SL.pdf?cite=2019%20c%2013%20§%2067); [1997 c 58 § 1005](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/1997-98/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/House/3901.SL.pdf?cite=1997%20c%2058%20§%201005); \]

## 43.20A.090 - Deputy secretary—Department personnel director—Assistant secretaries—Appointment—Duties—Salaries.
The secretary shall appoint a deputy secretary, a department personnel director and such assistant secretaries as shall be needed to administer the department. The deputy secretary shall have charge and general supervision of the department in the absence or disability of the secretary, and in case of a vacancy in the office of secretary, shall continue in charge of the department until a successor is appointed and qualified, or until the governor shall appoint an acting secretary. The officers appointed under this section, and exempt from the provisions of the state civil service law by the terms of *RCW 41.06.076, shall be paid salaries to be fixed by the governor in accordance with the procedure established by law for the fixing of salaries for officers exempt from the operation of the state civil service law.

\[ [2017 3rd sp.s. c 6 § 811](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/2017-18/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/House/1661-S2.SL.pdf?cite=2017%203rd%20sp.s.%20c%206%20§%20811); [1994 sp.s. c 7 § 515](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/1993-94/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/House/2319-S2.SL.pdf?cite=1994%20sp.s.%20c%207%20§%20515); [1970 ex.s. c 18 § 7](http://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1970ex1c18.pdf?cite=1970%20ex.s.%20c%2018%20§%207); \]

## 43.20A.105 - Social worker V employees—Implementation plan.
The secretary shall develop a plan for implementation for the social worker V employees. The implementation plan shall be submitted to the governor and the legislature by December 1, 1997. The department shall begin implementation of the plan beginning April 1, 1998. The department shall perform the duties assigned under *sections 3 through 5, chapter 386, Laws of 1997 and **RCW 41.06.076 within existing personnel resources.

\[ [1997 c 386 § 5](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/1997-98/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/Senate/5710-S2.SL.pdf?cite=1997%20c%20386%20§%205); \]

## 43.20A.110 - Secretary's delegation of powers and duties.
The secretary may delegate any power or duty vested in or transferred to him or her by law, or executive order, to his or her deputy secretary or to any other assistant or subordinate; but the secretary shall be responsible for the official acts of the officers and employees of the department.

\[ [2009 c 549 § 5074](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/2009-10/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/Senate/5038.SL.pdf?cite=2009%20c%20549%20§%205074); [1970 ex.s. c 18 § 9](http://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1970ex1c18.pdf?cite=1970%20ex.s.%20c%2018%20§%209); \]

## 43.20A.130 - Secretary or designee as member of state board of health.
See RCW 43.20.030.

\[ \]

## 43.20A.167 - Federal Older Americans Act of 1965—Department to participate in and administer.
See RCW 74.36.100.

\[ \]

## 43.20A.168 - Community programs and projects for the aging.
See RCW 74.36.110 through 74.36.130.

\[ \]

## 43.20A.205 - Denial, suspension, revocation, or modification of license.
This section governs the denial of an application for a license or the suspension, revocation, or modification of a license by the department.

1. The department shall give written notice of the denial of an application for a license to the applicant or his or her agent. The department shall give written notice of revocation, suspension, or modification of a license to the licensee or his or her agent. The notice shall state the reasons for the action. The notice shall be personally served in the manner of service of a summons in a civil action or shall be given in another manner that shows proof of receipt.

2. Except as otherwise provided in this subsection and in subsection (4) of this section, revocation, suspension, or modification is effective twenty-eight days after the licensee or the agent receives the notice.

    a.  The department may make the date the action is effective later than twenty-eight days after receipt. If the department does so, it shall state the effective date in the written notice given the licensee or agent.

    b.  The department may make the date the action is effective sooner than twenty-eight days after receipt when necessary to protect the public health, safety, or welfare. When the department does so, it shall state the effective date and the reasons supporting the effective date in the written notice given to the licensee or agent.

    c.  When the department has received certification pursuant to chapter 74.20A RCW from the division of child support that the licensee is a person who is not in compliance with a support order or an order from court stating that the licensee is in noncompliance with a *residential or visitation order under chapter 26.09 RCW, the department shall provide that the suspension is effective immediately upon receipt of the suspension notice by the licensee.

3. Except for licensees suspended for noncompliance with a support order under chapter 74.20A RCW or a *residential or visitation order under chapter 26.09 RCW, a license applicant or licensee who is aggrieved by a department denial, revocation, suspension, or modification has the right to an adjudicative proceeding. The proceeding is governed by the Administrative Procedure Act, chapter 34.05 RCW. The application must be in writing, state the basis for contesting the adverse action, include a copy of the adverse notice, be served on and received by the department within twenty-eight days of the license applicant's or licensee's receiving the adverse notice, and be served in a manner that shows proof of receipt.

4. [Empty]

    a.  If the department gives a licensee twenty-eight or more days notice of revocation, suspension, or modification and the licensee files an appeal before its effective date, the department shall not implement the adverse action until the final order has been entered. The presiding or reviewing officer may permit the department to implement part or all of the adverse action while the proceedings are pending if the appellant causes an unreasonable delay in the proceeding, if the circumstances change so that implementation is in the public interest, or for other good cause.

    b.  If the department gives a licensee less than twenty-eight days notice of revocation, suspension, or modification and the licensee timely files a sufficient appeal, the department may implement the adverse action on the effective date stated in the notice. The presiding or reviewing officer may order the department to stay implementation of part or all of the adverse action while the proceedings are pending if staying implementation is in the public interest or for other good cause.

\[ [1997 c 58 § 841](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/1997-98/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/House/3901.SL.pdf?cite=1997%20c%2058%20§%20841); [1989 c 175 § 95](http://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1989c175.pdf?cite=1989%20c%20175%20§%2095); \]

## 43.20A.215 - Assessment of civil fine.
This section governs the assessment of a civil fine against a person by the department.

1. The department shall written give [written] notice to the person against whom it assesses a civil fine. The notice shall state the reasons for the adverse action. The notice shall be personally served in the manner of service of a summons in a civil action or shall be given in an other manner that shows proof of receipt.

2. Except as otherwise provided in subsection (4) of this section, the civil fine is due and payable twenty-eight days after receipt. The department may make the date the fine is due later than twenty-eight days after receipt. When the department does so, it shall state the effective date in the written notice given the person against whom it assesses the fine.

3. The person against whom the department assesses a civil fine has the right to an adjudicative proceeding. The proceeding is governed by the Administrative Procedure Act, chapter 34.05 RCW. The application must be in writing, state the basis for contesting the fine, include a copy of the adverse notice, be served on and received by the department within twenty-eight days of the person's receiving the notice of civil fine, and be served in a manner which shows proof of receipt.

4. If the person files a timely and sufficient appeal, the department shall not implement the action until the final order has been served. The presiding or reviewing officer may permit the department to implement part or all of the action while the proceedings are pending if the appellant causes an unreasonable delay in the proceedings or for other good cause.

\[ [1989 c 175 § 96](http://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1989c175.pdf?cite=1989%20c%20175%20§%2096); \]

## 43.20A.300 - Department as state agency for receipt of federal funds for vocational rehabilitation—Exception.
Except as provided in RCW 74.18.060, the department of social and health services shall serve as the sole agency of the state for the receipt of federal funds made available by acts of congress for vocational rehabilitation within this state.

\[ [1983 c 194 § 28](http://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1983c194.pdf?cite=1983%20c%20194%20§%2028); [1977 ex.s. c 40 § 15](http://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1977ex1c40.pdf?cite=1977%20ex.s.%20c%2040%20§%2015); [1970 ex.s. c 18 § 40](http://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1970ex1c18.pdf?cite=1970%20ex.s.%20c%2018%20§%2040); \]

## 43.20A.310 - Vocational rehabilitation, powers and duties of secretary or designee.
In addition to his or her other powers and duties, the secretary or his or her designee, shall have the following powers and duties:

1. To prepare, adopt and certify the state plan for vocational rehabilitation;

2. With respect to vocational rehabilitation, to adopt necessary rules and regulations and do such other acts not forbidden by law necessary to carry out the duties imposed by state law and the federal acts;

3. To carry out the aims and purposes of the acts of congress pertaining to vocational rehabilitation.

\[ [2009 c 549 § 5075](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/2009-10/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/Senate/5038.SL.pdf?cite=2009%20c%20549%20§%205075); [1979 c 141 § 65](http://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1979c141.pdf?cite=1979%20c%20141%20§%2065); [1970 ex.s. c 18 § 42](http://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1970ex1c18.pdf?cite=1970%20ex.s.%20c%2018%20§%2042); \]

## 43.20A.320 - Consultation with coordinating council for occupational education.
The secretary or his or her designee shall consult with the coordinating council for occupational education in order to maintain close contact with developing programs of vocational education, particularly as such programs may affect programs undertaken in connection with vocational rehabilitation.

\[ [2009 c 549 § 5076](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/2009-10/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/Senate/5038.SL.pdf?cite=2009%20c%20549%20§%205076); [1970 ex.s. c 18 § 43](http://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1970ex1c18.pdf?cite=1970%20ex.s.%20c%2018%20§%2043); \]

## 43.20A.350 - Committees and councils—Declaration of purpose.
The legislature declares that meaningful citizen involvement with and participation in the planning and programs of the department of social and health services are essential in order that the public may better understand the operations of the department, and the department staff may obtain the views and opinions of concerned and affected citizens. As a result of the creation of the department of social and health services and the resulting restructuring of programs and organization of the department's components, and as a further result of the legislative mandate to the department to organize and deliver services in a manner responsive to changing needs and conditions, it is necessary to provide for flexibility in the formation and functioning of the various committees and councils which presently advise the department, to restructure the present committees and councils, and to provide for new advisory committees and councils, so that all such committees and councils will more appropriately relate to the changing programs and services of the department.

\[ [1971 ex.s. c 189 § 1](http://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1971ex1c189.pdf?cite=1971%20ex.s.%20c%20189%20§%201); \]

## 43.20A.360 - Committees and councils—Appointment—Memberships—Terms—Vacancies—Travel expenses.
1. The secretary is hereby authorized to appoint such advisory committees or councils as may be required by any federal legislation as a condition to the receipt of federal funds by the department. The secretary may appoint statewide committees or councils in the following subject areas: (a) Health facilities; (b) blind services; (c) medical and health care; (d) drug abuse and alcoholism; (e) social services; (f) economic services; (g) vocational services; (h) rehabilitative services; and (i) on such other subject matters as are or come within the department's responsibilities. The statewide councils shall have representation from both major political parties and shall have substantial consumer representation. Such committees or councils shall be constituted as required by federal law or as the secretary in his or her discretion may determine. The members of the committees or councils shall hold office for three years except in the case of a vacancy, in which event appointment shall be only for the remainder of the unexpired term for which the vacancy occurs. No member shall serve more than two consecutive terms.

2. Members of such state advisory committees or councils may be paid their travel expenses in accordance with RCW 43.03.050 and 43.03.060 as now existing or hereafter amended.

\[ [2017 3rd sp.s. c 6 § 328](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/2017-18/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/House/1661-S2.SL.pdf?cite=2017%203rd%20sp.s.%20c%206%20§%20328); [2001 c 291 § 101](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/2001-02/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/Senate/5401-S.SL.pdf?cite=2001%20c%20291%20§%20101); [1989 1st ex.s. c 9 § 214](http://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1989ex1c9.pdf?cite=1989%201st%20ex.s.%20c%209%20§%20214); [1989 c 11 § 14](http://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1989c11.pdf?cite=1989%20c%2011%20§%2014); [1984 c 259 § 1](http://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1984c259.pdf?cite=1984%20c%20259%20§%201); [1981 c 151 § 6](http://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1981c151.pdf?cite=1981%20c%20151%20§%206); [1977 c 75 § 45](http://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1977c75.pdf?cite=1977%20c%2075%20§%2045); 1975-'76 2nd ex.s. c 34 § 98; [1971 ex.s. c 189 § 2](http://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1971ex1c189.pdf?cite=1971%20ex.s.%20c%20189%20§%202); \]

## 43.20A.390 - Per diem or mileage—Limitation.
Notwithstanding any other provision of chapter 189, Laws of 1971 ex. sess., no person shall receive as compensation or reimbursement for per diem or mileage authorized in chapter 189, Laws of 1971 ex. sess. any amount that would exceed the per diem or mileage provided in RCW 43.03.050 and 43.03.060.

\[ [1971 ex.s. c 189 § 16](http://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1971ex1c189.pdf?cite=1971%20ex.s.%20c%20189%20§%2016); \]

## 43.20A.400 - Purchase of services from public or nonprofit agencies—Utilization of nonappropriated funds.
Notwithstanding any other provisions of law, the secretary of the department of social and health services is authorized to utilize nonappropriated funds made available to the department, in order to compliment the social and health services programs of the department by purchase of services from public or nonprofit agencies. The purpose of this authorization is to augment the services presently offered and to achieve pooling of public and nonprofit resources.

\[ [1971 ex.s. c 309 § 1](http://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1971ex1c309.pdf?cite=1971%20ex.s.%20c%20309%20§%201); \]

## 43.20A.405 - Purchase of services from public or nonprofit agencies—Vendor rates—Establishment.
After obtaining the review and advice of the governor's advisory committee on vendor rates, the secretary shall establish rates of payment for services which are to be purchased: PROVIDED, That the secretary shall afford all interested persons reasonable opportunity to submit data, views, or arguments, and shall consider fully all submissions respecting the proposed rates. Prior to the establishment of such rates, the secretary shall give at least twenty days notice of such intended action by mail to such persons or agencies as have made timely request of the secretary for advance notice of establishment of such vendor rates. Such rates shall not exceed the amounts reasonable and necessary to assure quality services and shall not exceed the costs reasonably assignable to such services pursuant to cost finding and monitoring procedures to be established by the secretary. Information to support such rates of payment shall be maintained in a form accessible to the public.

\[ [1971 ex.s. c 309 § 2](http://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1971ex1c309.pdf?cite=1971%20ex.s.%20c%20309%20§%202); \]

## 43.20A.410 - Purchase of services from public or nonprofit agencies—Factors to be considered.
In determining whether services should be purchased from other public or nonprofit agencies, the secretary shall consider:

1. Whether the particular service or services is available or might be developed.

2. The probability that program and workload performance standards will be met, by means of the services purchased.

3. The availability of reasonably adequate cost finding and performance evaluation criteria.

Nothing in RCW 43.20A.400 through 43.20A.430 is to be construed to authorize reduction in state employment in service component areas presently rendering such services.

\[ [1971 ex.s. c 309 § 3](http://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1971ex1c309.pdf?cite=1971%20ex.s.%20c%20309%20§%203); \]

## 43.20A.415 - Purchase of services from public or nonprofit agencies—Retention of basic responsibilities by secretary.
When, pursuant to RCW 43.20A.400 through 43.20A.430, the secretary elects to purchase a service or services, he or she shall retain continuing basic responsibility for:

1. Determining the eligibility of individuals for services;

2. The selection, quality, effectiveness, and execution of a plan or program of services suited to the need of an individual or of a group of individuals; and

3. Measuring the cost effectiveness of purchase of services.

\[ [2009 c 549 § 5077](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/2009-10/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/Senate/5038.SL.pdf?cite=2009%20c%20549%20§%205077); [1971 ex.s. c 309 § 4](http://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1971ex1c309.pdf?cite=1971%20ex.s.%20c%20309%20§%204); \]

## 43.20A.420 - Purchase of services from public or nonprofit agencies—Secretary to provide consultative, technical and development services to suppliers—Review of services.
The secretary shall work with the suppliers of purchased services by:

1. Providing consultation and technical assistance;

2. Monitoring and periodically reviewing services in order to assure satisfactory performance including adherence to state prescribed workload and quality standards; and

3. Developing new and more effective and efficient approaches to and methods of delivering services.

\[ [1971 ex.s. c 309 § 5](http://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1971ex1c309.pdf?cite=1971%20ex.s.%20c%20309%20§%205); \]

## 43.20A.425 - Purchase of services from public or nonprofit agencies—Qualifications of vendors.
The secretary shall assure that sources from which services are purchased are: (1) Licensed, or (2) meet applicable accrediting standards, or (3) in the absence of licensing or accrediting standards, meet standards or criteria established by the secretary to assure quality of service: PROVIDED, That this section shall not be deemed to dispense with any licensing or accrediting requirement imposed by any other provision of law, by any county or municipal ordinance, or by rule or regulation of any public agency.

\[ [1971 ex.s. c 309 § 6](http://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1971ex1c309.pdf?cite=1971%20ex.s.%20c%20309%20§%206); \]

## 43.20A.430 - Purchase of services from public or nonprofit agencies—Retention of sums to pay departmental costs.
The secretary shall, if not otherwise prohibited by law, pursuant to agreement between the department and the agency in each contract, retain from such nonappropriated funds sufficient sums to pay for the department's administrative costs, monitoring and evaluating delivery of services, and such other costs as may be necessary to administer the department's responsibilities under RCW 43.20A.400 through 43.20A.430.

\[ [1971 ex.s. c 309 § 7](http://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1971ex1c309.pdf?cite=1971%20ex.s.%20c%20309%20§%207); \]

## 43.20A.445 - State-operated workshops at institutions—Authorized—Standards.
The department may establish and operate workshops for the training, habilitation, and rehabilitation of residents of institutions of the department. Products, goods, wares, articles, or merchandise manufactured or produced by the workshops may be sold to governmental agencies or on the open market at fair value. Prior to establishment of new state-operated workshops at institutions, the department shall consider the availability, appropriateness, and relative cost of contracting with and giving first preference to private nonprofit sheltered workshops, as defined in RCW 82.04.385, to provide workshop activities for residents of the institution.

The secretary shall credit the moneys derived from the sale of items from workshops under this section to a revolving fund under the control of the superintendent of the institution or facility where the items were manufactured. These moneys shall be expended for the purchase of supplies and materials for use in the workshop, to provide pay and training incentives for residents, and for other costs of the operation of the workshop. Payment of residents for work performed on workshop projects shall take into account resident productivity in comparison to the productivity of a nondisabled person earning the minimum wage as well as other factors consistent with goals of rehabilitation and treatment. Institutional work training programs shall be operated in accordance with standards required by the department for private vendors for the same or similar service.

Workshop materials and supplies may be purchased through state purchasing or from private vendors. Each institution or facility shall maintain records to demonstrate that purchases are made at the fair market value or best available price.

\[ [1983 1st ex.s. c 41 § 20](http://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1983ex1c41.pdf?cite=1983%201st%20ex.s.%20c%2041%20§%2020); \]

## 43.20A.465 - Contracted service providers—Disruption or delay by economic or industrial actions.
1. Any contract entered into or renewed by the department with a private contractor for adult care, mental health, addiction, disability support, or youth services must contain an assurance that the contracted services will not be disrupted or delayed by economic or industrial action. The assurance may be provided through the execution of an agreement between the contractor and any labor organization that represents or seeks to represent the employees of the private contractor that perform or will perform the essential services contracted for by the department.

2. The assurance required under subsection (1) of this section must be a condition of contracting with the department and may be satisfied through one or more of the following contractual commitments made on the part of the contractor through the life of the contract as a condition of receiving or renewing a contract:

    a.  An agreement between the contractor and any exclusive representative labor organization representing the employees performing the contracted services that contains a provision prohibiting economic or industrial action on the part of all parties and includes a process for the resolution of disputes between them;

    b.  An agreement between the contractor and any labor organization seeking to represent the employees performing the contracted services that includes a provision prohibiting the parties from causing, promoting, or encouraging economic, industrial, or other disruptive activity on the part of the contractor or employees performing services under the contract, and includes a process for resolution of disputes between parties; or

    c.  Any other agreement or binding obligation providing assurances equivalent to those specified in (a) and (b) of this subsection that are to be maintained through the life of the contract.

3. The assurance made to the department must be a binding provision of any contract subject to this section and constitutes a warranty to the department on the part of the contractor.

4. Failure to maintain the assurance, such that the services contracted by the department are interrupted, shall entitle the department to terminate, suspend, or revoke the contract and make arrangements for the provision of services by other means.

5. In awarding any contract subject to this section, the department must take into consideration any prior disruptions in the provision of services by the contractor and whether the assurance provided by the contractor pursuant to this section has mitigated the risk of a reoccurrence of the disruptions, if any.

6. Any contract subject to this section that is awarded or renewed must include a provision providing for reimbursement to the department of the actual costs to the department arising from the inadequacy of the assurance provided by the contractor.

\[ [2020 c 201 § 2](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/2019-20/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/Senate/6096.SL.pdf?cite=2020%20c%20201%20§%202); \]

## 43.20A.550 - Federal programs—Rules and regulations—Internal reorganization to meet federal requirements—Statutes to be construed to meet federal law—Conflicting parts deemed inoperative.
In furtherance of the policy of the state to cooperate with the federal government in all of the programs under the jurisdiction of the department, such rules and regulations as may become necessary to entitle the state to participate in federal funds may be adopted, unless the same be expressly prohibited by law. Any internal reorganization carried out under the terms of this chapter shall meet federal requirements which are a necessary condition to state receipt of federal funds. Any section or provision of law dealing with the department which may be susceptible to more than one construction shall be interpreted in favor of the construction most likely to comply with federal laws entitling this state to receive federal funds for the various programs of the department. If any law dealing with the department is ruled to be in conflict with federal requirements which are a prescribed condition of the allocation of federal funds to the state, or to any departments or agencies thereof, such conflicting part of chapter 18, Laws of 1970 ex. sess. is declared to be inoperative solely to the extent of the conflict.

\[ [1979 c 141 § 66](http://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1979c141.pdf?cite=1979%20c%20141%20§%2066); [1970 ex.s. c 18 § 66](http://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1970ex1c18.pdf?cite=1970%20ex.s.%20c%2018%20§%2066); \]

## 43.20A.605 - Authority to administer oaths and issue subpoenas—Provisions governing subpoenas.
1. The secretary or a designee shall have full authority to administer oaths and take testimony thereunder, to issue subpoenas requiring the attendance of witnesses before him or her together with all books, memoranda, papers, and other documents, articles or instruments, and to compel the disclosure by such witnesses of all facts known to them relative to the matters under investigation.

2. Subpoenas issued in adjudicative proceedings are governed by RCW 34.05.588(1).

3. Subpoenas issued in the conduct of investigations required or authorized by other statutory provisions or necessary in the enforcement of other statutory provisions shall be governed by RCW 34.05.588(2).

4. When a judicially approved subpoena is required by law, the secretary or designee may apply for and obtain a superior court order approving and authorizing a subpoena in advance of its issuance. The application may be made in the county where the subpoenaed person resides or is found, or in the county where the subpoenaed documents, records, or evidence are located, or in Thurston county. The application must:

    a.  State that an order is sought under this section;

    b.  Adequately specify the documents, records, evidence, or testimony; and

    c.  Include a declaration made under oath that an investigation is being conducted for a lawfully authorized purpose related to an investigation within the department's authority and that the subpoenaed documents, records, evidence, or testimony are reasonably related to an investigation within the department's authority.

5. When an application under subsection (4) of this section is made to the satisfaction of the court, the court must issue an order approving the subpoena. When a judicially approved subpoena is required by law, an order under this subsection constitutes authority of law for the agency to subpoena the documents, records, evidence, or testimony.

6. The secretary or designee may seek approval and a court may issue an order under this section without prior notice to any person, including the person to whom the subpoena is directed and the person who is the subject of an investigation. An application for court approval is subject to the fee and process set forth in RCW 36.18.012(3).

\[ [2011 1st sp.s. c 42 § 23](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/2011-12/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/Senate/5921-S.SL.pdf?cite=2011%201st%20sp.s.%20c%2042%20§%2023); [2009 c 549 § 5078](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/2009-10/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/Senate/5038.SL.pdf?cite=2009%20c%20549%20§%205078); [1989 c 175 § 97](http://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1989c175.pdf?cite=1989%20c%20175%20§%2097); [1983 1st ex.s. c 41 § 21](http://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1983ex1c41.pdf?cite=1983%201st%20ex.s.%20c%2041%20§%2021); [1979 c 141 § 47](http://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1979c141.pdf?cite=1979%20c%20141%20§%2047); [1967 ex.s. c 102 § 2](http://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1967ex1c102.pdf?cite=1967%20ex.s.%20c%20102%20§%202); \]

## 43.20A.607 - Authority to appoint a single executive officer for multiple institutions—Exception.
The secretary may appoint one individual to serve as chief executive officer, administrator, or superintendent for more than one facility or institution of the department where one or both facilities or institutions are required by law to have a chief executive officer, administrator, or superintendent. This section, however, shall not apply to RCW 72.40.020.

\[ [1983 1st ex.s. c 41 § 25](http://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1983ex1c41.pdf?cite=1983%201st%20ex.s.%20c%2041%20§%2025); \]

## 43.20A.610 - Employment of deputies, experts, physicians, etc.
The secretary may appoint and employ such deputies, scientific experts, physicians, nurses, sanitary engineers, and other personnel including consultants, and such clerical and other assistants as may be necessary to carry on the work of the department of social and health services.

\[ [1979 c 141 § 48](http://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1979c141.pdf?cite=1979%20c%20141%20§%2048); [1967 ex.s. c 102 § 8](http://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1967ex1c102.pdf?cite=1967%20ex.s.%20c%20102%20§%208); [1965 c 8 § 43.20.040](http://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1965c8.pdf?cite=1965%20c%208%20§%2043.20.040); [1961 ex.s. c 5 § 1](http://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1961ex1c5.pdf?cite=1961%20ex.s.%20c%205%20§%201); [1921 c 7 § 57](http://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1921c7.pdf?cite=1921%20c%207%20§%2057); RRS § 10815; \]

## 43.20A.635 - Services for children with disabilities.
It shall be the duty of the secretary of social and health services and he or she shall have the power to establish and administer a program of services for children with disabilities or who are suffering from physical conditions which lead to disabilities, which shall provide for developing, extending, and improving services for locating such children, and for providing for medical, surgical, corrective, and other services and care, and facilities for diagnosis, hospitalization, and aftercare; to supervise the administration of those services, included in the program, which are not administered directly by it; to extend and improve any such services, including those in existence on April 1, 1941; to cooperate with medical, health, nursing, and welfare groups and organizations, and with any agency of the state charged with the administration of laws providing for vocational rehabilitation of children with physical disabilities; to cooperate with the federal government, through its appropriate agency or instrumentality in developing, extending, and improving such services; and to receive and expend all funds made available to the department by the federal government, the state or its political subdivisions or from other sources, for such purposes.

\[ [2020 c 274 § 21](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/2019-20/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/House/2390.SL.pdf?cite=2020%20c%20274%20§%2021); [2009 c 549 § 5079](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/2009-10/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/Senate/5038.SL.pdf?cite=2009%20c%20549%20§%205079); [1979 c 141 § 52](http://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1979c141.pdf?cite=1979%20c%20141%20§%2052); [1965 c 8 § 43.20.130](http://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1965c8.pdf?cite=1965%20c%208%20§%2043.20.130); [1941 c 129 § 1](http://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1941c129.pdf?cite=1941%20c%20129%20§%201); Rem. Supp. 1941 § 9992-107a; prior:  1937 c 114 § 7. Formerly RCW  74.12.210; 43.20.130; \]

## 43.20A.660 - Reports of violations by secretary—Duty of attorney general, prosecuting attorney or city attorney to institute proceedings—Notice to alleged violator.
1. It shall be the duty of each assistant attorney general, prosecuting attorney, or city attorney to whom the secretary reports any violation of chapter 43.20A RCW, or regulations promulgated thereunder, to cause appropriate proceedings to be instituted in the proper courts, without delay, and to be duly prosecuted as prescribed by law.

2. Before any violation of chapter 43.20A RCW is reported by the secretary to the prosecuting attorney for the institution of a criminal proceeding, the person against whom such proceeding is contemplated shall be given appropriate notice and an opportunity to present his or her views to the secretary, either orally or in writing, with regard to such contemplated proceeding.

\[ [2009 c 549 § 5080](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/2009-10/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/Senate/5038.SL.pdf?cite=2009%20c%20549%20§%205080); [1989 1st ex.s. c 9 § 215](http://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1989ex1c9.pdf?cite=1989%201st%20ex.s.%20c%209%20§%20215); [1979 c 141 § 57](http://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1979c141.pdf?cite=1979%20c%20141%20§%2057); [1967 ex.s. c 102 § 7](http://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1967ex1c102.pdf?cite=1967%20ex.s.%20c%20102%20§%207); \]

## 43.20A.675 - Office of the deaf and hard of hearing—Educational materials.
The office of the deaf and hard of hearing shall develop educational materials to be distributed by hearing aid dispensers, including audiologists, to persons with hearing loss that explains the uses, benefits, and limitations of current hearing assistive technologies as defined by the department of health in rule.

\[ [2019 c 183 § 3](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/2019-20/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/Senate/5210.SL.pdf?cite=2019%20c%20183%20§%203); \]

## 43.20A.680 - State council on aging established.
The state council on aging is hereby established as an advisory council to the governor, the secretary of social and health services, and the office of aging or any other office solely designated as the state unit on aging. The state council on aging may be designated by the governor to serve as the state advisory council to the state unit on aging with respect to federally funded programs as required by federal regulation. The director of the state unit on aging shall provide appropriate staff support.

\[ [1981 c 151 § 1](http://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1981c151.pdf?cite=1981%20c%20151%20§%201); \]

## 43.20A.685 - State council on aging—Membership—Terms—Vacancies—Chairperson—Secretary—Compensation of legislative members.
1. Members of the council shall be appointed to terms of three years, except in the case of a vacancy, in which event appointment shall be for the remainder of the unexpired term for which the vacancy occurs. No member of the council may serve more than two consecutive three-year terms. Each area agency on aging advisory council shall appoint one member from its state-designated planning and service area. The governor shall appoint one additional member from names submitted by the association of Washington cities and one additional member from names submitted by the Washington state association of counties. In addition, the governor may appoint not more than five at large members, in order to ensure that rural areas (those areas outside of a standard metropolitan statistical area), minority populations, and those individuals with special skills which could assist the state council are represented. The members of the state council on aging shall elect, at the council's initial meeting and at the council's first meeting each year, one member to serve as chairperson of the council and another member to serve as secretary of the council.

2. The speaker of the house of representatives and the president of the senate shall each appoint two nonvoting members to the council; one from each of the two largest caucuses in each house. The terms of the members so appointed shall be for approximately two years and the terms shall expire before the first day of the legislative session in odd-numbered years. They shall be compensated by their respective houses as provided under RCW 44.04.120, as now or hereafter amended.

3. With the exception of the members from the Washington state association of cities, the Washington state association of counties, and the nonvoting legislative members, all members of the council shall be at least fifty-five years old.

\[ [2011 1st sp.s. c 21 § 31](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/2011-12/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/House/1371-S2.SL.pdf?cite=2011%201st%20sp.s.%20c%2021%20§%2031); [1981 c 151 § 2](http://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1981c151.pdf?cite=1981%20c%20151%20§%202); \]

## 43.20A.690 - State council on aging—Meetings—Compensation of nonlegislative members.
The state council on aging shall meet monthly unless determined otherwise by a majority vote of the members, which vote shall be taken at a regular meeting of the council. Nonlegislative members shall serve without compensation but shall be reimbursed for travel expenses and per diem in the performance of their duties as provided in RCW 43.03.050 and 43.03.060 as now existing or hereafter amended.

\[ [1981 c 151 § 3](http://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1981c151.pdf?cite=1981%20c%20151%20§%203); \]

## 43.20A.695 - State council on aging—Powers and duties—Bylaws.
1. The state council on aging has the following powers and duties:

    a.  To serve in an advisory capacity to the governor, the secretary of social and health services, and the state unit on aging on all matters pertaining to policies, programs, and services affecting older persons;

    b.  To create public awareness of the special needs and potentialities of older persons; and

    c.  To provide for self-advocacy by older citizens of the state through sponsorship of training, legislative and other conferences, workshops, and such other methods as may be deemed appropriate.

2. The council shall establish bylaws to aid in the performance of its powers and duties.

\[ [1981 c 151 § 4](http://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1981c151.pdf?cite=1981%20c%20151%20§%204); \]

## **43.20A.710 - Investigation of conviction records or pending charges of state employees and individual providers.**
1. The secretary shall investigate the conviction records, pending charges and disciplinary board final decisions of:

    a. Any current employee or applicant seeking or being considered for any position with the department who will or may have unsupervised access to children, vulnerable adults, or individuals with mental illness or developmental disabilities. This includes, but is not limited to, positions conducting comprehensive assessments, financial eligibility determinations, licensing and certification activities, investigations, surveys, or case management; or for state positions otherwise required by federal law to meet employment standards;

    b. Individual providers as defined in RCW 74.39A.240 and providers who are paid by home care agencies to provide in-home services involving unsupervised access to persons with physical, mental, or developmental disabilities or mental illness, or to vulnerable adults as defined in chapter 74.34 RCW, including but not limited to services provided under chapter 74.39 or 74.39A RCW; and

    c. Individuals or businesses or organizations for the care, supervision, case management, or treatment of children, persons with developmental disabilities, or vulnerable adults, including but not limited to services contracted for under chapter 18.20, 70.127, 70.128, 72.36, or 74.39A RCW or Title 71A RCW.

2. The secretary shall require a fingerprint-based background check through both the Washington state patrol and the federal bureau of investigation as provided in RCW 43.43.837. Unless otherwise authorized by law, the secretary shall use the information solely for the purpose of determining the character, suitability, and competence of the applicant.

3. Except as provided in subsection (4) of this section, an individual provider or home care agency provider who has resided in the state less than three years before applying for employment involving unsupervised access to a vulnerable adult as defined in chapter 74.34 RCW must be fingerprinted for the purpose of investigating conviction records through both the Washington state patrol and the federal bureau of investigation. This subsection applies only with respect to the provision of in-home services funded by medicaid personal care under RCW 74.09.520, community options program entry system waiver services under RCW 74.39A.030, or chore services under RCW 74.39A.110. However, this subsection does not supersede RCW 74.15.030(2).

4. Long-term care workers, as defined in RCW 74.39A.009, who are hired after January 7, 2012, are subject to background checks under RCW 74.39A.056, except that the department may require a background check at any time under RCW 43.43.837. For the purposes of this subsection, "background check" includes, but is not limited to, a fingerprint check submitted for the purpose of investigating conviction records through both the Washington state patrol and the federal bureau of investigation.

5. An individual provider or home care agency provider hired to provide in-home care for and having unsupervised access to a vulnerable adult as defined in chapter 74.34 RCW must have no conviction for a disqualifying crime under RCW 43.43.830 and 43.43.842. An individual or home care agency provider must also have no conviction for a crime relating to drugs as defined in RCW 43.43.830. This subsection applies only with respect to the provision of in-home services funded by medicaid personal care under RCW 74.09.520, community options program entry system waiver services under RCW 74.39A.030, or chore services under RCW 74.39A.110.

6. The secretary shall provide the results of the state background check on long-term care workers, including individual providers, to the persons hiring them or to their legal guardians, if any, for their determination of the character, suitability, and competence of the applicants. If the person elects to hire or retain an individual provider after receiving notice from the department that the applicant has a conviction for an offense that would disqualify the applicant from having unsupervised access to persons with physical, mental, or developmental disabilities or mental illness, or to vulnerable adults as defined in chapter 74.34 RCW, then the secretary shall deny payment for any subsequent services rendered by the disqualified individual provider.

7. Criminal justice agencies shall provide the secretary such information as they may have and that the secretary may require for such purpose.

8. Any person whose criminal history would otherwise disqualify the person under this section **or RCW 43.43.842,** from a position which will or may have unsupervised access to children, vulnerable adults, or persons with mental illness or developmental disabilities shall not be **automatically** disqualified if **:**

    a. **The** department of social and health services reviewed the person's otherwise disqualifying criminal history through the department of social and health services' background assessment review team process conducted in 2002 and determined that such person could remain in a position covered by this section**;**

    b. **The conviction is no longer automatically disqualifying pursuant to section 1 of this act;**

    c. **The applicant has received a certificate of restoration of opportunity for the convictions pursuant to RCW 9.97.020, and the department of social and health services has not disqualified the applicant based on character, competence, and suitability review; or**

    d. **The** conviction or disposition has been the subject of a pardon, annulment, or other equivalent procedure.

9. The department may not consider any founded finding of physical abuse or negligent treatment or maltreatment of a child made pursuant to chapter 26.44 RCW that is accompanied by a certificate of parental improvement or dependency as a result of a finding of abuse or neglect pursuant to chapter 13.34 RCW that is accompanied by a certificate of parental improvement when evaluating an applicant or employee's character, competency, and suitability pursuant to any background check authorized or required by this chapter, RCW 74.39A.056 or 43.43.832, or any of the rules adopted thereunder.

## 43.20A.711 - Receipt and use of criminal history information.
The secretary is authorized to receive criminal history record information that includes nonconviction data for any purpose associated with an investigation under chapter 74.04 RCW. Dissemination or use of nonconviction data for purposes other than that authorized in this section is prohibited.

\[ [2008 c 74 § 4](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/2007-08/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/House/2955.SL.pdf?cite=2008%20c%2074%20§%204); \]

## 43.20A.715 - Long-term care worker screening—Limitations on disqualification.
1. Where the department is required to screen a long-term care worker, contracted provider, or licensee through a background check to determine whether the person has a history that would disqualify the person from having unsupervised access to, working with, or providing supervision, care, or treatment to vulnerable adults or children, the department may not automatically disqualify a person on the basis of a criminal record that includes a conviction of any of the following crimes once the specified amount of time has passed for the particular crime:

    a.  Selling marijuana to a person under RCW 69.50.401 after three years or more have passed between the most recent conviction and the date the background check is processed;

    b.  Theft in the first degree under RCW 9A.56.030 after 10 years or more have passed between the most recent conviction and the date the background check is processed;

    c.  Robbery in the second degree under RCW 9A.56.210 after five years or more have passed between the most recent conviction and the date the background check is processed;

    d.  Extortion in the second degree under RCW 9A.56.130 after five years or more have passed between the most recent conviction and the date the background check is processed;

    e.  Assault in the second degree under RCW 9A.36.021 after five years or more have passed between the most recent conviction and the date the background check is processed; and

    f.  Assault in the third degree under RCW 9A.36.031 after five years or more have passed between the most recent conviction and the date the background check is processed.

2. The provisions of subsection (1) of this section do not apply where the department is performing background checks for the department of children, youth, and families.

3. The provisions of subsection (1) of this section do not apply to department employees or applicants for department positions except for positions in the state-operated community residential program.

4. Notwithstanding subsection (1) of this section, a long-term care worker, contracted provider, or licensee may not provide, or be paid to provide, care to children or vulnerable adults under the medicare or medicaid programs if the worker is excluded from participating in those programs by federal law.

5. The department, a contracted provider, or a licensee, when conducting a character, competence, and suitability review for the purpose of hiring, licensing, certifying, contracting with, permitting, or continuing to permit a person to be employed in any position caring for or having unsupervised access to vulnerable adults or children, may, in its sole discretion, determine whether to consider any of the convictions identified in subsection (1) of this section. If the department or a consumer directed employer as defined in RCW 74.39A.009 determines that an individual with any of the convictions identified in subsection (1) of this section is qualified to provide services to a department client as an individual provider as defined in RCW 74.39A.240, the department or the consumer directed employer must provide the client, and their guardian if any, with the results of the state background check for their determination of character, suitability, and competence of the individual before the individual begins providing services. The department, a contracted provider, or a licensee, when conducting a character, competence, and suitability review for the purpose of hiring, licensing, certifying, contracting with, permitting, or continuing to permit a person to be employed in any position caring for or having unsupervised access to vulnerable adults or children, has a rebuttable presumption that its exercise of discretion under this section or the refusal to exercise such discretion was appropriate. This subsection does not create a duty for the department to conduct a character, competence, and suitability review.

6. For the purposes of the section:

    a.  "Contracted provider" means a provider, and its employees, contracted with the department or an area agency on aging to provide services to department clients under programs under chapter 74.09, 74.39, 74.39A, or 71A.12 RCW. "Contracted provider" includes area agencies on aging and their subcontractors who provide case management.

    b.  "Licensee" means a nonstate facility or setting that is licensed or certified, or has applied to be licensed or certified, by the department and includes the licensee and its employees.

\[ [2021 c 219 § 1](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/2021-22/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/House/1411-S.SL.pdf?cite=2021%20c%20219%20§%201); \]

## 43.20A.720 - Telecommunications devices and services for the hearing and speech impaired—Definitions.
Unless the context clearly requires otherwise, the definitions in this section apply throughout this section and RCW 43.20A.725.

1. "Hearing impaired" means those persons who are certified to be deaf, deaf-blind, or hard of hearing, and those persons who are certified to have a hearing disability limiting their access to telecommunications.

2. "Speech impaired" means persons who are certified to be unable to speak or who are certified to have a speech impairment limiting their access to telecommunications.

3. "Department" means the department of social and health services.

4. "Office" means the office of deaf and hard of hearing within the state department of social and health services.

\[ [2001 c 210 § 1](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/2001-02/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/House/1884-S.SL.pdf?cite=2001%20c%20210%20§%201); [1992 c 144 § 2](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/1991-92/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/Senate/6377-S.SL.pdf?cite=1992%20c%20144%20§%202); [1990 c 89 § 2](http://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1990c89.pdf?cite=1990%20c%2089%20§%202); [1987 c 304 § 2](http://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1987c304.pdf?cite=1987%20c%20304%20§%202); \]

## 43.20A.725 - Telecommunications devices for the hearing and speech impaired—Program for provision of services and equipment—Rules.
Subject to the enactment into law of the 2013 amendments to RCW 82.14B.040 in section 103, chapter 8, Laws of 2013 2nd sp. sess., the 2013 amendments to RCW 82.14B.042 in section 104, chapter 8, Laws of 2013 2nd sp. sess., the 2013 amendments to RCW 82.14B.030 in section 105, chapter 8, Laws of 2013 2nd sp. sess., the 2013 amendments to RCW 82.14B.200 in section 106, chapter 8, Laws of 2013 2nd sp. sess., and the 2013 amendments to RCW 82.08.0289 in section 107, chapter 8, Laws of 2013 2nd sp. sess.:

1. The department, through the sole authority of the office or its successor organization, must maintain a program whereby an individual of school age or older who possesses a hearing or speech impairment is provided with telecommunications equipment, software, and/or peripheral devices, digital or otherwise, that is determined by the office to be necessary for such a person to access and use telecommunications transmission services effectively.

2. The department, through the sole authority of the office or its successor organization, must maintain a program where telecommunications relay services of a human or electronic nature will be provided to connect hearing impaired, deaf-blind, or speech impaired persons with persons who do not have a hearing or speech impairment. Such telecommunications relay services must provide the ability for an individual who has a hearing or speech impairment to engage in voice, tactile, or visual communication by wire or radio with a hearing individual in a manner that is functionally equivalent to the ability of an individual who does not have a hearing or speech impairment to communicate using voice or visual communication services by wire or radio subject to subsection (4)(b) of this section.

3. The telecommunications relay service and equipment distribution program may operate in such a manner as to provide communications transmission opportunities that are capable of incorporating new technologies that have demonstrated benefits consistent with the intent of this chapter and are in the best interests of the citizens of this state.

4. The office must administer and control the award of money to all parties incurring costs in implementing and maintaining telecommunications services, programs, equipment, and technical support services according to this section. The relay service contract must be awarded to an individual company registered as a telecommunications company by the utilities and transportation commission, to a group of registered telecommunications companies, or to any other company or organization determined by the office as qualified to provide relay services, contingent upon that company or organization being approved as a registered telecommunications company prior to final contract approval. The relay system providers and telecommunications equipment vendors must be selected on the basis of cost-effectiveness and utility to the greatest extent possible under the program and technical specifications established by the office.

    a.  To the extent funds are available for the purposes authorized by this chapter, the office may award contracts for communications and related services and equipment for hearing impaired or speech impaired individuals accessing or receiving services provided by, or contracted for, the department to meet access obligations under Title 2 of the federal Americans with disabilities act or related federal regulations.

    b.  The office must perform its duties under this section with the goal of achieving functional equivalency of access to and use of telecommunications services similar to the enjoyment of access to and use of such services experienced by an individual who does not have a hearing or speech impairment only to the extent that funds are available for the purposes authorized by this chapter.

5. The program must be funded by the legislature by means of a biennial general fund appropriation to the department for the purposes of the program.

6. The telecommunications relay service program and equipment vendors must provide services and equipment consistent with the requirements of federal law for the operation of both interstate and intrastate telecommunications services for the hearing impaired or speech impaired. The department and the utilities and transportation commission are responsible for ensuring compliance with federal requirements and must provide timely notice to the legislature of any legislation that may be required to accomplish compliance.

7. The department must adopt rules establishing eligibility criteria, ownership obligations, financial contributions, and a program for distribution to individuals requesting and receiving such telecommunications devices distributed by the office, and other rules necessary to administer programs and services consistent with this chapter.

\[ [2013 2nd sp.s. c 8 § 109](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/2013-14/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/House/1971-S2.SL.pdf?cite=2013%202nd%20sp.s.%20c%208%20§%20109); [2011 1st sp.s. c 50 § 944](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/2011-12/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/House/1087-S.SL.pdf?cite=2011%201st%20sp.s.%20c%2050%20§%20944); [2010 1st sp.s. c 37 § 921](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/2009-10/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/Senate/6444-S.SL.pdf?cite=2010%201st%20sp.s.%20c%2037%20§%20921); [2004 c 254 § 1](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/2003-04/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/Senate/6448.SL.pdf?cite=2004%20c%20254%20§%201); [2001 c 210 § 2](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/2001-02/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/House/1884-S.SL.pdf?cite=2001%20c%20210%20§%202); [1998 c 245 § 59](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/1997-98/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/Senate/6219.SL.pdf?cite=1998%20c%20245%20§%2059); [1993 c 425 § 1](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/1993-94/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/House/1752-S.SL.pdf?cite=1993%20c%20425%20§%201); [1992 c 144 § 3](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/1991-92/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/Senate/6377-S.SL.pdf?cite=1992%20c%20144%20§%203); [1990 c 89 § 3](http://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1990c89.pdf?cite=1990%20c%2089%20§%203); [1987 c 304 § 3](http://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1987c304.pdf?cite=1987%20c%20304%20§%203); \]

## 43.20A.735 - Domestic violence perpetrator programs. (Effective July 1, 2022.)
Any program that provides domestic violence treatment to perpetrators of domestic violence must be certified by the department of social and health services and meet minimum standards for domestic violence treatment purposes. The department of social and health services shall adopt rules for standards of approval of domestic violence perpetrator programs. The treatment must meet the following minimum qualifications:

1. All treatment must be based upon a full, complete clinical intake including but not limited to: Current and past violence history; a lethality risk assessment; history of treatment from past domestic violence perpetrator treatment programs; a complete diagnostic evaluation; a substance abuse assessment; criminal history; assessment of cultural issues, learning disabilities, literacy, and special language needs; and a treatment plan that adequately and appropriately addresses the treatment needs of the individual.

2. To facilitate communication necessary for periodic safety checks and case monitoring, the program must require the perpetrator to sign the following releases:

    a.  A release for the program to inform the victim and victim's community and legal advocates that the perpetrator is in treatment with the program, and to provide information, for safety purposes, to the victim and victim's community and legal advocates;

    b.  A release to prior and current treatment agencies to provide information on the perpetrator to the program; and

    c.  A release for the program to provide information on the perpetrator to relevant legal entities including: Lawyers, courts, parole, probation, child protective services, and child welfare services.

3. Treatment must be for a minimum treatment period defined by the secretary of the department of social and health services by rule. The weekly treatment sessions must be in a group unless there is a documented, clinical reason for another modality. Any other therapies, such as individual, marital, or family therapy, substance abuse evaluations or therapy, medication reviews, or psychiatric interviews, may be concomitant with the weekly group treatment sessions described in this section but not a substitute for it.

4. The treatment must focus primarily on ending the violence, holding the perpetrator accountable for his or her violence, and changing his or her behavior. The treatment must be based on nonvictim-blaming strategies and philosophies and shall include education about the individual, family, and cultural dynamics of domestic violence. If the perpetrator or the victim has a minor child, treatment must specifically include education regarding the effects of domestic violence on children, such as the emotional impacts of domestic violence on children and the long-term consequences that exposure to incidents of domestic violence may have on children.

5. Satisfactory completion of treatment must be contingent upon the perpetrator meeting specific criteria, defined by rule by the secretary of the department of social and health services, and not just upon the end of a certain period of time or a certain number of sessions.

6. The program must have policies and procedures for dealing with reoffenses and noncompliance.

7. All evaluation and treatment services must be provided by, or under the supervision of, qualified personnel.

8. The secretary of the department of social and health services may adopt rules and establish fees as necessary to implement this section.

9. The department of social and health services may conduct on-site monitoring visits as part of its plan for certifying domestic violence perpetrator programs and monitoring implementation of the rules adopted by the secretary of the department of social and health services to determine compliance with the minimum qualifications for domestic violence perpetrator programs. The applicant or certified domestic violence perpetrator program shall cooperate fully with the department of social and health services in the monitoring visit and provide all program and management records requested by the department of social and health services to determine the program's compliance with the minimum certification qualifications and rules adopted by the department of social and health services.

\[ [2019 c 470 § 5](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/2019-20/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/Senate/5955-S.SL.pdf?cite=2019%20c%20470%20§%205); [2017 3rd sp.s. c 6 § 334](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/2017-18/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/House/1661-S2.SL.pdf?cite=2017%203rd%20sp.s.%20c%206%20§%20334); [2010 c 274 § 501](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/2009-10/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/House/2777-S.SL.pdf?cite=2010%20c%20274%20§%20501); [1999 c 147 § 1](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/1999-00/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/House/1181-S.SL.pdf?cite=1999%20c%20147%20§%201); [1991 c 301 § 7](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/1991-92/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/House/1884-S.SL.pdf?cite=1991%20c%20301%20§%207); \]

## 43.20A.760 - Community and technical college students' eligibility for the Washington basic food program.
1. [Empty]

    a.  For the purposes of community and technical college students' eligibility for the Washington basic food program, the department shall, in consultation with the state board for community and technical colleges, identify educational programs at the community and technical colleges that would meet the requirements of state-approved employment and training programs.

    b.  In identifying educational programs, the department must consider science, technology, engineering, and mathematics programs and must be as inclusive as possible of other programs.

    c.  The department shall maintain and regularly update a list of identified programs in accordance with 7 C.F.R. Sec. 273.5(b)(11), which provides that a student is eligible for an exemption from eligibility rules if the student's attendance can be described as part of a program to increase the student's employability.

    d.  For the purposes of this section, and to the extent allowed by federal law, a student shall be anticipating participation through a work-study program if he or she can reasonably expect or foresee being assigned work-study employment. For the purposes of this subsection: "Anticipation [Anticipating] participation" means a student has received approval of work-study as part of a financial aid package and has yet to receive notice from the institution of higher education that he or she has been denied participation in work-study; and "work-study" means the program created in chapter 28B.12 RCW.

    e.  The department shall coordinate with the state board of [for] community and technical colleges and the Washington state student achievement council to identify options that could confer categorical eligibility for students who receive state need grants that are funded through temporary assistance for needy families federal or state maintenance of effort dollars. By January 1, 2020, the department must provide a report to the appropriate committees of the legislature that identifies federal assistance options for state need grant recipients.

2. If the United States department of agriculture requires federal approval of what constitutes state-approved employment and training programs for the purposes of basic food eligibility, the department shall seek federal approval.

\[ [2019 c 407 § 4](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/2019-20/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/House/1893-S2.SL.pdf?cite=2019%20c%20407%20§%204); \]

## 43.20A.765 - Mental health first aid training for teachers and educational staff.
Subject to appropriation for this specific purpose, the department shall provide funds for mental health first aid training targeted at teachers and educational staff. The training will follow the model developed by the department of psychology in Melbourne, Australia. Instruction provided will describe common mental disorders that arise in youth, their possible causes and risk factors, the availability of evidence-based medical, psychological, and alternative treatments, processes for making referrals for behavioral health services, and methods to effectively render assistance in both initial intervention and crisis situations. The department shall collaborate with the office of the superintendent of public instruction to identify sites and methods of instruction that leverage local resources to the extent possible for the purpose of making the mental health first aid training broadly available.

\[ [2013 c 197 § 9](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/2013-14/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/House/1336-S.SL.pdf?cite=2013%20c%20197%20§%209); \]

## 43.20A.770 - Administration of statutes applicable to runaway youth, at-risk youth, and families in conflict—Consistency required.
The department shall ensure that the administration of chapter 13.32A RCW and applicable portions of chapter 74.13 RCW relating to runaway youth, at-risk youth, and families in conflict is consistent in all areas of the state and in accordance with statutory requirements.

\[ [1991 c 364 § 6](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/1991-92/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/Senate/5025-S2.SL.pdf?cite=1991%20c%20364%20§%206); \]

## 43.20A.790 - Homeless families with children—Shelter and housing services.
1. The department shall collaborate with the *department of community, trade, and economic development in the development of the coordinated and comprehensive plan for homeless families with children required under RCW 43.63A.650, which designates the *department of community, trade, and economic development as the state agency with primary responsibility for providing shelter and housing services to homeless families with children. In fulfilling its responsibilities to collaborate with the *department of community, trade, and economic development pursuant to RCW 43.63A.650, the department shall develop, administer, supervise, and monitor its portion of the plan. The department's portion of the plan shall contain at least the following elements:

    a.  Coordination or linkage of services with shelter and housing;

    b.  Accommodation and addressing the needs of homeless families in the design and administration of department programs;

    c.  Participation of the department's local offices in the identification, assistance, and referral of homeless families; and

    d.  Ongoing monitoring of the efficiency and effectiveness of the plan's design and implementation.

2. The department shall include community organizations involved in the delivery of services to homeless families with children, and experts in the development and ongoing evaluation of the plan.

3. The duties under this section shall be implemented within amounts appropriated for that specific purpose by the legislature in the operating and capital budgets.

\[ [1999 c 267 § 2](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/1999-00/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/House/1493-S2.SL.pdf?cite=1999%20c%20267%20§%202); \]

## 43.20A.800 - Vision services for the homeless—Coordination.
The secretary of the department of social and health services shall coordinate the efforts of nonprofit agencies working with the homeless, the Washington academy of eye physicians and surgeons, the Washington optometric association, and the opticians association of Washington to deliver vision services to the homeless free of charge. The secretary shall enter into agreements identifying cooperating agencies and the circumstances under which specified services will be delivered.

\[ [1993 c 96 § 2](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/1993-94/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/House/1672-S.SL.pdf?cite=1993%20c%2096%20§%202); \]

## 43.20A.810 - Vision services for the homeless—Funding.
To the extent consistent with the department's budget, the secretary shall pay for the eyeglasses hardware prescribed and dispensed pursuant to the program set up in RCW 43.20A.800 through 43.20A.840. The secretary shall also attempt to obtain private sector funding for this program.

\[ [1993 c 96 § 3](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/1993-94/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/House/1672-S.SL.pdf?cite=1993%20c%2096%20§%203); \]

## 43.20A.820 - Vision services for the homeless—Use of used eyeglass frames by providers.
Ophthalmologists, optometrists, and dispensing opticians may utilize used eyeglass frames obtained through donations to this program.

\[ [1993 c 96 § 4](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/1993-94/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/House/1672-S.SL.pdf?cite=1993%20c%2096%20§%204); \]

## 43.20A.830 - Vision services for the homeless—Provider liability.
An ophthalmologist, optometrist, or dispensing optician who provides:

1. Free vision services; or

2. Eyeglasses, or any part thereof, including used frames, at or below retail cost to homeless people in the state of Washington

and who is not reimbursed for such services or eyeglasses as allowed for in RCW 43.20A.840, is not liable for civil damages for injury to a homeless person resulting from any act or omission in providing such services or eyeglasses, other than an act or omission constituting gross negligence or intentional conduct.

\[ [1993 c 96 § 5](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/1993-94/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/House/1672-S.SL.pdf?cite=1993%20c%2096%20§%205); \]

## 43.20A.840 - Vision services for the homeless—Third party payers.
Nothing in RCW 43.20A.800 through 43.20A.840 shall prevent ophthalmologists, optometrists, or dispensing opticians from collecting for either their goods or services, or both from third-party payers covering the goods or services for homeless persons.

\[ [1993 c 96 § 6](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/1993-94/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/House/1672-S.SL.pdf?cite=1993%20c%2096%20§%206); \]

## 43.20A.845 - Vision services for the homeless—Program name.
The program created in RCW 43.20A.800 through 43.20A.840 shall be known as the eye care for the homeless program in Washington.

\[ [1993 c 96 § 7](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/1993-94/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/House/1672-S.SL.pdf?cite=1993%20c%2096%20§%207); \]

## 43.20A.865 - Secretary to enter into agreements with health care authority—Division of responsibilities.
The secretary shall enter into agreements with the director of the health care authority, in his or her capacity as the director of the designated single state agency to administer medical services programs under Titles XIX and XXI of the social security act, to establish the division of responsibilities between the agencies with respect to mental health, chemical dependency, and long-term care services, including services for people with developmental disabilities. Except to the extent expressly authorized in the omnibus operating budget or other legislative act and where necessary to improve coordination of care for individual clients, nothing in this section or in section 116, chapter 15, Laws of 2011 1st sp. sess. shall be construed as authorizing the secretary or the director to transfer funds appropriated to one agency or program in the omnibus operating budget to another agency or program.

\[ [2011 1st sp.s. c 15 § 123](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/2011-12/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/House/1738-S2.SL.pdf?cite=2011%201st%20sp.s.%20c%2015%20§%20123); \]

## 43.20A.875 - Employee incentive program pilot—WorkFirst program.
No later than January 1, 2012, the department shall establish an employee incentive program pilot for those employees who work directly with participants in the WorkFirst program. The pilot shall provide for eight hours of paid annual leave per year, in addition to the annual leave the employee normally accrues, for those employees who assist participants in meeting certain outcomes to be established by the department. The outcomes established must be of significance for the participant and can include achieving unsubsidized employment or the removal of a significant barrier to unsubsidized employment. The department shall report to the legislature by January 1, 2013, on the implementation of the pilot project, including how many employees received paid annual leave, what outcomes were achieved, and the savings associated with the achievement of the outcomes.

\[ [2011 1st sp.s. c 42 § 27](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/2011-12/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/Senate/5921-S.SL.pdf?cite=2011%201st%20sp.s.%20c%2042%20§%2027); \]

## 43.20A.880 - Training competencies and learning outcomes.
The department shall publish its final basic and specialty training competencies and learning outcomes as required by chapter 121, Laws of 2000 no later than June 1, 2002.

\[ [2002 c 233 § 2](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/2001-02/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/House/2707-S.SL.pdf?cite=2002%20c%20233%20§%202); \]

## 43.20A.930 - Effective date—Severability—1970 ex.s. c 18.
See notes following RCW 43.20A.010.

\[ \]


## **43.20A.XXX - TBD**
**
1. Where the department is required to screen a long-term care worker, contracted provider, or licensee through a background check to determine whether the person has a history that would disqualify the person from having unsupervised access to, working with, or providing supervision, care, or treatment to vulnerable adults or children, the department may not automatically disqualify a person on the basis of a criminal record that includes a conviction of any of the following crimes once the specified amount of time has passed for the particular crime:

    a. Selling marijuana to a person under the age of 21 under RCW 69.50.475 after three years or more have passed between the most recent conviction and the date the background check is processed;

    b. Theft in the first degree under RCW 9A.56.030 after five years or more have passed between the most recent conviction and the date the background check is processed;

    c. Robbery in the second degree under RCW 9A.56.210 after five years or more have passed between the most recent conviction and the date the background check is processed;

    d. Extortion in the second degree under RCW 9A.56.130 after five years or more have passed between the most recent conviction and the date the background check is processed;

    e. Assault in the second degree under RCW 9A.36.021 after five years or more have passed between the most recent conviction and the date the background check is processed; and

    f. Assault in the third degree under RCW 9A.36.031 after five years or more have passed between the most recent conviction and the date the background check is processed.

2. The provisions of subsection (1) of this section do not apply where the department is performing background checks for the department of children, youth, and families.

3. The provisions of subsection (1) of this section do not apply to department employees or applicants for department positions except for positions in the state-operated community residential program.

4. Notwithstanding subsection (1) of this section, a long-term care worker, department-contracted provider, or licensee may not provide, or be paid to provide, care to children or vulnerable adults under the medicare or medicaid programs if the worker is excluded from participating in those programs by federal law.

5. The department, a contracted employee, or a licensee, when conducting a character, competence, and suitability review for the purpose of hiring, licensing, certifying, contracting with, permitting, or continuing to permit a person to be employed in any position caring for or having unsupervised access to vulnerable adults or children, may, in its sole discretion, determine whether to consider any of the convictions identified in subsection (1) of this section. The department, a contracted employee, or a licensee, when conducting a character, competence, and suitability review for the purpose of hiring, licensing, certifying, contracting with, permitting, or continuing to permit a person to be employed in any position caring for or having unsupervised access to vulnerable adults or children, is immune from suit in law, equity, or under the administrative procedure act for damages based upon its exercise of discretion under this section or the refusal to exercise such discretion. This subsection does not create a duty for the department to conduct a character, competence, and suitability review.

6. For the purposes of the section:

    a. "Contracted provider" means a provider, and its employees, who is, or applies to be, contracted with the department to provide services to department clients under programs under chapter 74.09, 74.39, 74.39A, or 71A.12 RCW.

    b. "Licensee" means a nonstate facility or setting that is licensed or certified, or has applied to be licensed or certified, by the department and includes the licensee and its employees.


[ 2021 c XXX § 1; ]**
