# 84.70 - Destroyed property—Abatement or refund.
* [84.70.010 - Reduction in value—Abatement—Formulas—Appeal—Physical improvements to qualifying single-family dwellings.](#8470010---reduction-in-valueabatementformulasappealphysical-improvements-to-qualifying-single-family-dwellings)
* [84.70.040 - Arson destroyed property.](#8470040---arson-destroyed-property)
## **84.70.010 - Reduction in value—Abatement—Formulas—Appeal—Physical improvements to qualifying single-family dwellings.**
1. If, on or before December 31**st** in any calendar year, any real or personal property placed upon the assessment roll of that year is destroyed in whole or in part, or is in an area that has been declared a disaster area by the governor or the county legislative authority and has been reduced in value by more than twenty percent as a result of a natural disaster **or has been reduced in value by more than 20 percent as a result of use restrictions imposed by federal, state, or local government in response to a public health emergency**, the true and fair value of such property shall be reduced for that assessment year by an amount determined by taking the true and fair value of such taxable property before destruction or reduction in value and deduct therefrom the true and fair value of the remaining property after destruction or reduction in value.

2. Taxes levied for collection in the year in which the true and fair value has been reduced under subsection (1) of this section shall be abated in whole or in part as provided in this subsection. The amount of taxes to be abated shall be determined by first multiplying the amount deducted from the true and fair value under subsection (1) of this section by the rate of levy applicable to the property in the tax year. Then divide the product by the number of days in the year and multiply the quotient by the number of days remaining in the calendar year after the date of the destruction or reduction in value of the property. If taxes abated under this section have been paid, the amount paid shall be refunded under RCW 84.69.020. The tax relief provided for in this section for the tax year in which the damage or destruction occurred does not apply to property damaged or destroyed voluntarily.

3. No reduction in the true and fair value or abatements shall be made more than three years after the date of destruction or reduction in value.

4. The assessor shall make such reduction on his or her own motion; however, the taxpayer may make application for reduction on forms prepared by the department and provided by the assessor. **Such application shall include payment by the taxpayer of a fee that the assessor reasonably determines to be commensurate with the cost anticipated of processing the application.** The assessor shall notify the taxpayer of the amount of reduction.

5. If destroyed property is replaced prior to the valuation dates contained in RCW 36.21.080 and 36.21.090, the total taxable value for that assessment year shall not exceed the value as of the appropriate valuation date in RCW 36.21.080 or 36.21.090, whichever is appropriate.

6. The taxpayer may appeal the amount of reduction to the county board of equalization in accordance with the provisions of RCW 84.40.038. The board shall reconvene, if necessary, to hear the appeal.

## 84.70.040 - Arson destroyed property.
No relief under this chapter shall be given to any person who is convicted of arson with regard to the property for which relief is sought.

\[ [1987 c 319 § 7](http://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1987c319.pdf?cite=1987%20c%20319%20§%207); [1974 ex.s. c 196 § 6](http://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1974ex1c196.pdf?cite=1974%20ex.s.%20c%20196%20§%206); \]

