# 15.150 - Cannabis laboratory quality standards.
* [15.150.010 - Definitions.](#15150010---definitions)
* [15.150.020 - Interagency coordination team for cannabis laboratory quality standards.](#15150020---interagency-coordination-team-for-cannabis-laboratory-quality-standards)
* [15.150.030 - Cannabis testing laboratory quality standards—Rule making.](#15150030---cannabis-testing-laboratory-quality-standardsrule-making)
## 15.150.010 - Definitions.
The definitions in this section apply throughout this chapter unless the context clearly requires otherwise.

1. "Cannabis lab" means a laboratory that tests cannabis for compliance with product standards established by rule by the state liquor and cannabis board.

2. "Team" means the interagency coordination team for cannabis laboratory quality standards created in this chapter.

\[ [2022 c 135 § 2](https://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/2021-22/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/House/1859.SL.pdf?cite=2022%20c%20135%20§%202); \]

## 15.150.020 - Interagency coordination team for cannabis laboratory quality standards.
1. The interagency coordination team for cannabis laboratory quality standards is created. The team consists of the department, the liquor and cannabis board, and the department of health. The department is designated lead agency for the team and must provide the team with all necessary administrative support.

2. The agencies that make up the team must each dedicate administrative, policy, scientific, or other staff necessary to successfully accomplish the duties assigned to the team.

3. The team must:

   a. Coordinate among all participating agencies on agency policies, actions, and regulatory activities that relate to cannabis testing laboratory quality standards; and

   b. Advise the department on implementation and maintenance of cannabis testing laboratory quality standards topics including, but not limited to, analytical methods, validation protocols, quality assurance and quality control practices, project planning and sampling guides, and other topics as necessary to fulfill the purposes of the team and chapter 135, Laws of 2022. In making its recommendations, the team must take into account the cannabis science task force recommendations.

\[ [2022 c 135 § 3](https://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/2021-22/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/House/1859.SL.pdf?cite=2022%20c%20135%20§%203); \]

## 15.150.030 - Cannabis testing laboratory quality standards—Rule making.
1. The department must establish and maintain cannabis testing laboratory quality standards by rule in accordance with chapter 34.05 RCW.

2. Cannabis testing laboratory quality standards must include, but are not limited to, approved methods for testing cannabis for compliance with product standards established by rule by the state liquor and cannabis board or the department of health, method validation protocol, and performance measures and criteria applied to testing of cannabis products.

3. The department must take into account the recommendations of the team created in RCW 15.150.020.

4. Standards created under this chapter must be provided to the state department of ecology for use in the lab accreditation process described in RCW 69.50.348.

\[ [2022 c 135 § 4](https://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/2021-22/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/House/1859.SL.pdf?cite=2022%20c%20135%20§%204); \]

