# Substitute Senate Bill 5599 as Recommended by Labor, Commerce & Tribal Affairs

[Source](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/2021-22/Pdf/Bills/Senate%20Bills/5599-S.pdf)
## Section 1
> This section modifies existing section [19.28.191](/rcw/19_business_regulations—miscellaneous/19.028_electricians_and_electrical_installations.md). Here is the [modified chapter](rcw/19_business_regulations—miscellaneous/19.028_electricians_and_electrical_installations.md) for context.

1. Upon receipt of the application, the department shall review the application and determine whether the applicant is eligible to take an examination for the master journey level electrician, journey level electrician, master specialty electrician, or specialty electrician certificate of competency.

    a. To be eligible to take the examination for a master journey level electrician certificate of competency, the applicant must have possessed a valid journey level electrician certificate of competency for four years.

    b. To be eligible to take the examination for a master specialty electrician certificate of competency, the applicant must have possessed a valid specialty electrician certificate of competency, in the specialty applied for, for two years.

    c. To be eligible to take the examination for a journey level certificate of competency, the applicant must have **:**

        i. **Successfully** completed **the work experience and education requirements of an 8,000 hour electrical construction trade** apprenticeship program approved under chapter 49.04 RCW . Four thousand of the hours shall be **new electrical installations** in industrial or commercial **facilities** under the supervision of a master journey level electrician or journey level electrician and not more than a total of **4,000** hours in all specialties under the supervision of a master journey level electrician, journey level electrician, master specialty electrician working in that electrician's specialty, or specialty electrician working in that electrician's specialty. Specialty electricians with less than a **4,000** hour work experience requirement cannot credit the time required to obtain that specialty towards qualifying to become a journey level electrician. The holder of a specialty electrician certificate of competency with a **4,000** hour work experience requirement shall be allowed to credit the work experience required to obtain that certificate towards apprenticeship requirements for qualifying to take the examination for a journey level electrician certificate of competency**;**

        ii. **Successfully completed an 8,000 hour electrical construction trade apprenticeship program in another jurisdiction equivalent to an apprenticeship program approved under chapter 49.04 RCW. Four thousand of the hours shall be new electrical installations in industrial or commercial facilities;**

        iii. **At least 16,000 hours experience in the electrical construction trade installing and maintaining electrical wiring and equipment in another jurisdiction. Eight thousand of the hours shall be new electrical installations in industrial or commercial facilities; or**

        iv. **Eight thousand hours of experience in the electrical construction trade while serving in a construction battalion in the armed forces of the United States**.

    d. To be eligible to take the examination for a specialty electrician certificate of competency, the applicant must have:

        i. Worked in the residential (as specified in WAC 296-46B-920(2)(a)), pump and irrigation (as specified in WAC 296-46B-920(2)(b)), sign (as specified in WAC 296-46B-920(2)(d)), limited energy (as specified in WAC 296-46B-920(2)(e)), nonresidential maintenance (as specified in WAC 296-46B-920(2)(g)), or other new nonresidential specialties as determined by the department in rule under the supervision of a master journey level electrician, journey level electrician, master specialty electrician working in that electrician's specialty, or specialty electrician working in that electrician's specialty for a minimum of **4,000** hours;

        ii. Worked in the appliance repair specialty as determined by the department in rule, restricted nonresidential maintenance as determined by the department in rule, the equipment repair specialty as determined by the department in rule, the pump and irrigation specialty other than as defined by (d)(i) of this subsection or domestic pump specialty as determined by the department in rule, or a specialty other than the designated specialties in (d)(i) of this subsection for a minimum of the initial ninety days, or longer if set by rule by the department. The restricted nonresidential maintenance specialty is limited to a maximum of 277 volts and 20 amperes for lighting branch circuits and/or a maximum of 250 volts and 60 amperes for other circuits excluding the replacement or repair of circuit breakers. The department may alter the scope of work for the restricted nonresidential maintenance specialty by rule. The initial period must be spent under one hundred percent supervision of a master journey level electrician, journey level electrician, master specialty electrician working in that electrician's specialty, or specialty electrician working in that electrician's specialty. After this initial period, a person may take the specialty examination. If the person passes the examination, the person may work unsupervised for the balance of the minimum hours required for certification. A person may not be certified as a specialty electrician in the appliance repair specialty or in a specialty other than the designated specialties in (d)(i) of this subsection, however, until the person has worked a minimum of **2,000** hours in that specialty, or longer if set by rule by the department;

        iii. Successfully completed an approved apprenticeship program under chapter 49.04 RCW for the applicant's specialty in the electrical construction trade; or

        iv. In meeting the training requirements for the pump and irrigation or domestic pump specialties, the individual shall be allowed to obtain the experience required by this section at the same time the individual is meeting the experience required by RCW 18.106.040(1)(d). After meeting the training requirements provided in this section, the individual may take the examination and upon passing the examination, meeting additional training requirements as may still be required for those seeking a pump and irrigation, or a domestic pump specialty certificate as defined by rule, and paying the applicable fees, the individual must be issued the appropriate certificate. The department may include an examination for specialty plumbing certificate defined in RCW 18.106.010(14)(c) with the examination required by this section. The department, by rule and in consultation with the electrical board, may establish additional equivalent ways to gain the experience requirements required by this subsection. The department shall establish a single document for those who have received both an electrical specialty certification as defined by this subsection and have also met the certification requirements for the specialty plumber as defined by RCW 18.106.010(14)(c), showing that the individual has received both certifications. No other experience or training requirements may be imposed.

    e. Any applicant for a journey level electrician certificate of competency who has successfully completed a two-year program in the electrical construction trade at public community or technical colleges, or not-for-profit nationally accredited technical or trade schools licensed by the workforce training and education coordinating board under chapter 28C.10 RCW, may substitute up to two years of the technical or trade school program for two years of work experience under a master journey level electrician or journey level electrician required under the apprenticeship program. The applicant shall obtain the additional two years of work experience required in industrial or commercial electrical installation prior to the beginning, or after the completion, of the technical school program. Any applicant who has received training in the electrical construction trade in the armed service of the United States may be eligible to apply armed service work experience towards qualification to complete an apprenticeship and take the examination for the journey level electrician certificate of competency.

    f. An applicant for a specialty electrician certificate of competency who, after January 1, 2000, has successfully completed a two-year program in the electrical construction trade at a public community or technical college, or a not-for-profit nationally accredited technical or trade school licensed by the workforce training and education coordinating board under chapter 28C.10 RCW, may substitute up to one year of the technical or trade school program for one year of work experience under a master journey level electrician, journey level electrician, master specialty electrician working in that electrician's specialty, or specialty electrician working in that electrician's specialty. Any applicant who has received training in the electrical construction trade in the armed services of the United States may be eligible to apply armed service work experience towards qualification to take the examination for an appropriate specialty electrician certificate of competency.

    g. The department must determine whether hours of training and experience in the armed services or school program are in the electrical construction trade and appropriate as a substitute for hours of work experience. The department must use the following criteria for evaluating the equivalence of classroom electrical training programs and work in the electrical construction trade:

        i. A two-year electrical training program must consist of three thousand or more hours.

        ii. In a two-year electrical training program, a minimum of **2,400** hours of student/instructor contact time must be technical electrical instruction directly related to the scope of work of the electrical specialty. Student/instructor contact time includes lecture and in-school lab.

        iii. The department may not allow credit for a program that accepts more than **1,000** hours transferred from another school's program.

        iv. Electrical specialty training school programs of less than two years will have all of the above student/instructor contact time hours proportionately reduced. Such programs may not apply to more than fifty percent of the work experience required to attain certification.

    v. Electrical training programs of less than two years may not be credited towards qualification for journey level electrician unless the training program is used to gain qualification for a four thousand hour electrical specialty.

    h. No other requirement for eligibility may be imposed.

2. The department shall establish reasonable rules for the examinations to be given applicants for certificates of competency. In establishing the rules, the department shall consult with the board. Upon determination that the applicant is eligible to take the examination, the department shall so notify the applicant, indicating instructions for taking the examination.

3. No noncertified individual may work unsupervised more than one year beyond the date when the trainee would be eligible to test for a certificate of competency if working on a full-time basis after original application for the trainee certificate. For the purposes of this section, "full-time basis" means two thousand hours.


## Section 2
1. The apprenticeship council, established under chapter 49.04 RCW, must make recommendations to the legislature on potential solutions and incentives to help rural electrical contractors come into compliance with apprenticeship standards, including adequate electrical apprenticeship capacity by October 31, 2022.

2. In developing its recommendations under subsection (1) of this section, the apprenticeship council, or its electrical standards subcommittee, must allow for input from interested parties, including rural electrical contractors, at no fewer than two meetings with this issue as a topic, either at regularly scheduled meetings of the apprenticeship council or its electrical standards subcommittee or any additional meetings scheduled by the apprenticeship council or its electrical standards subcommittee for implementing this section. Additionally, the apprenticeship council must allow for public comment on its final recommendations before providing its recommendations to the legislature.

3. This section expires October 31, 2023.

