# 35.95A - City transportation authority—Monorail transportation.
* [35.95A.010 - Definitions.](#3595a010---definitions)
* [35.95A.020 - Creation of authority—Vote of the people.](#3595a020---creation-of-authorityvote-of-the-people)
* [35.95A.030 - Creation by ordinance—Proposal by petition.](#3595a030---creation-by-ordinanceproposal-by-petition)
* [35.95A.040 - Authority subject to standard requirements of governmental entity.](#3595a040---authority-subject-to-standard-requirements-of-governmental-entity)
* [35.95A.050 - Powers.](#3595a050---powers)
* [35.95A.060 - Funds and accounts—Designation of treasurer.](#3595a060---funds-and-accountsdesignation-of-treasurer)
* [35.95A.070 - Excess levies—General obligation bonds—Revenue bonds.](#3595a070---excess-leviesgeneral-obligation-bondsrevenue-bonds)
* [35.95A.080 - Special excise tax—Public hearings.](#3595a080---special-excise-taxpublic-hearings)
* [35.95A.090 - Vehicle license fees—Vote of the people.](#3595a090---vehicle-license-feesvote-of-the-people)
* [35.95A.100 - Property tax levies.](#3595a100---property-tax-levies)
* [35.95A.110 - Taxes and fees—Limitation on use.](#3595a110---taxes-and-feeslimitation-on-use)
* [35.95A.120 - Dissolution of authority.](#3595a120---dissolution-of-authority)
* [35.95A.130 - Special excise tax—Collection.](#3595a130---special-excise-taxcollection)
* [35.95A.140 - Requirements for signage.](#3595a140---requirements-for-signage)
## **35.95A.010 - Definitions.**
The definitions in this section apply throughout this chapter unless the context clearly requires otherwise.

1. **"Affordable housing" means long-term housing for persons, families, or unrelated persons living together whose adjusted income is at or below 60 percent of the median income, adjusted for household size, for the county where the housing is located.**

2. "Authority" means a city transportation authority created pursuant to chapter 248, Laws of 2002.

3. "Authority area" means the territory within a city as designated in the ordinance creating the authority.

4. "Bonds" means bonds, notes, or other evidences of indebtedness.

5. **"Low-income" means household income set by the authority creating the rebate program that is at or below 75 percent of the median household income, adjusted for household size, for the authority in which the taxes or fees were imposed.**

6. "Public **grade-separated** transportation function" means the transportation of passengers and their incidental baggage by means of public **grade-separated** transportation facilities as authorized in this chapter.

7. "Public **grade-separated** transportation facilities" means a **light, heavy, or rapid rail facility, monorail, inclined plane, funicular, trolley, or other fixed rail guideway component of a transportation system operating principally on exclusive rights-of-way that is not regulated by the federal railroad administration or its successor** that utilizes train cars running on a guideway, together with the necessary passenger stations, terminals, parking facilities, related facilities**, any lands, interest in land, or air rights over lands,** or other properties, and facilities necessary and appropriate for passenger and vehicular access to and from people-moving systems. **"Public grade-separated transportation facilities" does not mean elevators, moving sidewalks or stairs, and/or vehicles suspended from aerial cables, unless they are an integral component of a station served by public grade-separated transportation facilities; nor does it include facilities that are not public transportation, such as tourist services that are only accessible via private property, or other services not accessible to the general public.**

8. "Qualified elector" means any person registered to vote within the city boundaries.

9. **"Qualified entity" means a local government, housing authority, or nonprofit developer.**

10. **"Rebate program" means an optional program established by a city transportation authority that includes a city with a population of 500,000 persons or more for the purpose of providing rebates to low-income individuals for taxes and/or fees imposed by such city transportation authority for: (a) Special excise taxes imposed under RCW 35.95A.080; and/or (b) vehicle license fees imposed under RCW 35.95A.090.**

11. **"Transit-dependent" means a person that does not have personal transportation, no access to such transportation, or is unable to drive.**

## **35.95A.020 - Creation of authority—Vote of the people.**
1. A city transportation authority to perform a public **grade-separated** transportation function may be created in every city with a population greater than **500,000** to perform a public **grade-separated** transportation function. The authority shall embrace all the territory in the authority area. A city transportation authority is a municipal corporation, an independent taxing "authority" within the meaning of Article 7, section 1 of the state Constitution, and a "taxing district" within the meaning of Article 7, section 2 of the state Constitution.

2. Any city transportation authority and proposed taxes established pursuant to this chapter, either by ordinance or petition as provided in this chapter, must be approved by a majority vote of the electors residing within the proposed authority area voting at a regular or special election.

## **35.95A.030 - Creation by ordinance—Proposal by petition.**
1. A city that undertakes to propose creation of an authority must propose the authority by ordinance of the city legislative body. The ordinance must:

    a. Propose the authority area **, which authority area may encompass the entire city or a portion thereof**;

    b. Propose whether all or a specified portion of the public **grade-separated** transportation function will be exercised by the authority; **and**

    c. Propose an initial array of taxes to be voted upon by the electors within the proposed authority area

.

2. An authority may also be proposed to be created by a petition setting forth the matters described in subsection (1) of this section, and signed by one percent of the qualified electors of the proposed authority area.

3. Upon approval by the qualified electors of the formation of the city transportation authority and any proposed taxes, either by ordinance or by petition as provided in this chapter, the governing body of an authority will adopt bylaws determining, among other things, the authority's officers and the method of their selection, and other matters the governing body deems appropriate.

4. **Members of the legislative body governing the city in which the authority is proposed to be established, acting ex officio and independently, shall constitute the governing body of the authority.**

## 35.95A.040 - Authority subject to standard requirements of governmental entity.
The authority is subject to all standard requirements of a governmental entity pursuant to RCW 35.21.759.

\[ [2002 c 248 § 4](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/2001-02/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/Senate/6464-S.SL.pdf?cite=2002%20c%20248%20§%204); \]

## **35.95A.050 - Powers.**
Every authority has the following powers:

1. To acquire by purchase, condemnation, gift, or grant and to lease, construct, add to, improve, replace, repair, maintain, operate, and regulate the use of public **grade-separated** transportation facilities, including passenger terminal and parking facilities and properties, and other facilities and properties as may be necessary for passenger and vehicular access to and from public **grade-separated** transportation facilities, together with all lands, rights‑of‑way, and property within or outside the authority area, and together with equipment and accessories necessary or appropriate for these facilities, except that property, including but not limited to other types of public transportation facilities, that is owned by any city, county, county transportation authority, public transportation benefit area, metropolitan municipal corporation, or regional transit authority may be acquired or used by an authority only with the consent of the public entity owning the property. The entities are authorized to convey or lease property to an authority or to contract for their joint use on terms fixed by agreement between the entity and the authority;

2. To fix rates, tolls, fares, and charges for the use of facilities and to establish various routes and classes of service. Rates, tolls, fares, or charges may be adjusted or eliminated for any distinguishable class of users including, but not limited to, senior citizens and persons with disabilities;

3. To contract with the United States or any of its agencies, any state or any of its agencies, **any public transportation benefit district, county transportation authority, regional transit authority,** any metropolitan municipal corporation, and other country, city, other political subdivision or governmental instrumentality, or governmental agency, or any private person, firm, or corporation for **: (a) The** purpose of receiving any gifts or grants or securing loans or advances for preliminary planning and feasibility studies**; (b)** the design, construction, operation, or maintenance of public **grade-separated** transportation facilities

**; or (c) the provision or receipt of services, facilities, or property rights to provide revenues for the system. An authority shall have the power to contract pursuant to RCW 39.33.050. Before any contract is entered with any private person, firm, or corporation, competitive bids shall first be called upon such notice, bidder qualifications, and bid conditions as the board shall determine. This shall allow use of negotiated procurements. For the avoidance of doubt, the provisions of chapters 39.12 and 39.19 RCW apply to a contract entered into under this section as if the public transportation systems and facilities were owned by a public body regardless of the use of a negotiated procurement method**;

4. To contract with the United States or any of its agencies, any state or any of its agencies, any metropolitan municipal corporation, any other county, city, **regional transit authority,** other political subdivision or governmental instrumentality, any governmental agency, or any private person, firm, or corporation for the use by either contracting party of all or any part of the facilities, structures, lands, interests in lands, air rights over lands, and rights‑of‑way of all kinds which are owned, leased, or held by the other party **; or** for the purpose of planning, designing, constructing, operating any public transportation facility, or performing any service related to transportation which the authority is authorized to operate or perform, on terms as may be agreed upon by the contracting parties;

5. To acquire any existing public transportation facility by conveyance, sale, or lease. In any acquisition from a county, city, **regional transit authority,** or other political subdivision of the state, the authority will receive credit from the county or city or **regional transit authority or** other political subdivision for any federal assistance and state matching assistance used by the county or city **or regional transit authority** or other political subdivision in acquiring any portion of the public transportation facility. Upon acquisition, the authority must assume and observe all existing labor contracts relating to the public transportation facility and, to the extent necessary for operation of the public transportation facility, all of the employees of the public transportation facility whose duties are necessary to efficiently operate the public transportation facility must be appointed to comparable positions to those which they held at the time of the transfer, and no employee or retired or pensioned employee of the public transportation facility will be placed in any worse position with respect to pension seniority, wages, sick leave, vacation, or other benefits than he or she enjoyed as an employee of the public transportation facility prior to the acquisition. Furthermore, the authority must engage in collective bargaining with the duly appointed representatives of any employee labor organization having existing contracts with the acquired facility and may enter into labor contracts with the employee labor organization;

6. To  prepare, adopt, and carry out a comprehensive public **grade-separated system plan and financing** plan and to make other plans and studies and to perform programs as the authority deems necessary to implement and comply with those laws**. To the extent that new public grade-separated transportation corridors are planned, financing and system plans shall take into account (a) 30-year projected ridership, (b) the number of income-restricted affordable housing units within a 15-minute walking radius of stations, and (c) the number of transit-dependent households within a 15-minute walking radius of stations. On at least an annual basis throughout the planning process for each corridor, the authority shall consider and report the anticipated ridership, the number of income-restricted affordable housing units within a 15-minute walking radius of stations, and the number of transit-dependent households within a 15-minute walking radius of stations for each studied alternative within each corridor. The reports shall be continuously posted on the authority's website from the release of reports until the dissolution of the authority**;

7. To establish local improvement districts within the authority area to finance public **grade-separated** transportation facilities, to levy special assessments on property specially benefited by those facilities, and to issue local improvement bonds to be repaid by the collection of local improvement assessments. The method of establishment, levying, collection, enforcement, and all other matters relating to the local improvement districts, assessments, collection, and bonds are as provided in the statutes governing local improvement districts of cities and towns. The duties devolving upon the city treasurer in those statutes are imposed on the treasurer of the authority;

8. To exercise all other powers necessary and appropriate to carry out its responsibilities, including without limitation the power to sue and be sued, to own, construct, purchase, lease, add to, and maintain any real and personal property or property rights necessary for the conduct of the affairs of the authority, to enter into contracts, and to employ the persons as the authority deems appropriate. An authority may also sell, lease, convey, or otherwise dispose of any real or personal property no longer necessary for the conduct of the affairs of the authority**;**

9. **Notwithstanding any other provision of this chapter, to the extent new public grade-separated transportation facilities are to be constructed by the authority, or using the funds collected by the authority, the authority may construct new public grade-separated transportation facilities for operation in entirely exclusive rights-of-way without grade crossings. This subsection does not limit the authority from maintaining or improving existing facilities that may be transferred to the authority. Public grade-separated transportation facilities constructed by the authority, or using the funds collected by the authority, may be constructed at surface level elevation or in a retained cut. For the purposes of this subsection, "grade crossings" means a place where a mode of transportation other than public grade-separated transportation facilities crosses with public grade-separated transportation facilities at the same elevation or where the crossing of another mode of transportation may hinder the movement of train cars operating in public grade-separated transportation facilities;**

10. **To use the powers provided herein to construct public grade-separated transportation facilities to be designated as supplemental transportation improvements for purposes of RCW 35.21.925, by the city containing the authority area;**

11. **To establish offices, departments, boards, and commissions that are necessary to carry out the purposes of the authority, and to prescribe the functions, powers, and duties thereof;**

12. **To appoint or provide for the appointment of, and to remove or to provide for the removal of, all officers and employees of the authority;**

13. **To fix the salaries, wages, and other compensation of all officers and employees of the authority;**

14. **To employ such engineering, legal, financial, or other specialized personnel as may be necessary to accomplish the purposes of the authority;**

15. **To determine risks, hazards, and liabilities in order to obtain insurance consistent with these determinations. This insurance may include any types of insurance covering, and for the benefit of, one or more parties with whom the authority contracts for any purpose, and insurance for the benefit of its board members, authority officers, and employees to insure against liability for acts or omissions while performing or in good faith purporting to perform their official duties. All insurance obtained for construction of authority projects with a total project cost exceeding $100,000,000 may be acquired by bid or by negotiation. In order to allow the authority flexibility to secure appropriate insurance by negotiation, the authority is exempt from RCW 48.30.270;**

16. **To dispose of any real or personal property acquired in connection with any authority function and that is no longer required for the purposes of the authority, in the same manner as provided for cities of the first class. When an authority determines that a facility or any part thereof that has been acquired from any public agency without compensation is no longer required for authority purposes, but is required by the agency from which it was acquired, the authority shall by resolution transfer it to such agency**.

## **35.95A.060 - Funds and accounts—Designation of treasurer.**
Each authority will establish necessary and appropriate funds and accounts consistent with the uniform system of accounts developed pursuant to RCW 43.09.210. The authority **shall** contract with any city with territory within the authority area for treasury and other financial functions. The city must be reimbursed for the expenses of treasury services. However, no city whose treasurer serves as treasurer of an authority is liable for the obligations of the authority.

## **35.95A.070 - Excess levies—General obligation bonds—Revenue bonds.**
Every authority has the power to:

1. Levy excess levies upon the property included within the authority area, in the manner prescribed by Article VII, section 2 of the state Constitution and by RCW 84.52.052 for operating funds, capital outlay funds, and cumulative reserve funds;

2. Issue general obligation bonds, not to exceed an amount, together with any outstanding nonvoter-approved general obligation indebtedness equal to one and one-half percent of the value of the taxable property within the authority area, as the term "value of the taxable property" is defined in RCW 39.36.015. An authority may additionally issue general obligation bonds, together with outstanding voter‑approved and nonvoter-approved general obligation indebtedness, equal to two and one-half percent of the value of the taxable property within the authority area, as the term "value of the taxable property" is defined in RCW 39.36.015, when the bonds are approved by three-fifths of the qualified electors of the authority at a general or special election called for that purpose and may provide for the retirement thereof by levies in excess of dollar rate limitations in accordance with the provisions of RCW 84.52.056. These elections will be held as provided in RCW 39.36.050;

3. Issue revenue bonds payable from any revenues other than taxes levied by the authority, and to pledge those revenues for the repayment of the bonds. Proceeds of revenue bonds may only be expended for the costs of public **grade-separated** transportation facilities, for financing costs, and for capitalized interest during construction plus six months thereafter. The bonds and warrants will be issued and sold in accordance with chapter 39.46 RCW.

No bonds issued by an authority are obligations of any city, county, or the state of Washington or any political subdivision thereof other than the authority, and the bonds will so state, unless the legislative authority of any city or county or the legislature expressly authorizes particular bonds to be either guaranteed by or obligations of its respective city or county or of the state.

## **35.95A.080 - Special excise tax—Public hearings.**
1. Every authority has the power to levy and collect a special excise tax not exceeding two and one-half percent on the value of every motor vehicle owned by a resident of the authority area for the privilege of using a motor vehicle. Before utilization of any excise tax money collected under this section for acquisition of right‑of‑way or construction of a public **grade-separated** transportation facility on a separate right‑of‑way, the authority must adopt rules affording the public an opportunity for **a** public hearing‑‑**to include public comment**. In adopting **such** rules the authority must adhere to the provisions of the administrative procedure act.

2.

An authority imposing a tax under subsection (1) of this section may also impose a sales and use tax, in addition to any tax authorized by RCW 82.14.030, upon retail car rentals within the city that are taxable by the state under chapters 82.08 and 82.12 RCW. The rate of tax must not exceed 1.944 percent of the base of the tax. The base of the tax will be the selling price in the case of a sales tax or the rental value of the vehicle used in the case of a use tax. The revenue collected under this subsection will be distributed in the same manner as sales and use taxes under chapter 82.14 RCW.

3. Before any authority may impose any of the taxes authorized under this section, the authorization for imposition of the taxes must be approved by the qualified electors of the authority area.

## 35.95A.090 - Vehicle license fees—Vote of the people.
1. Every authority has the power to fix and impose a fee, not to exceed one hundred dollars per vehicle, for each vehicle that is subject to relicensing tab fees under RCW 46.17.350(1) (a), (c), (d), (e), (g), (h), (j), or (n) through (q) and for each vehicle that is subject to RCW 46.17.355 with a scale weight of six thousand pounds or less, and that is determined by the department of licensing to be registered within the boundaries of the authority area. The department of licensing must provide an exemption from the fee for any vehicle the owner of which demonstrates is not operated within the authority area.

2. The department of licensing will administer and collect the fee. The department will deduct a percentage amount, as provided by contract, not to exceed two percent of the taxes collected, for administration and collection expenses incurred by it. The remaining proceeds will be remitted to the custody of the state treasurer for monthly distribution to the authority.

3. The authority imposing this fee will delay the effective date at least six months from the date the fee is approved by the qualified voters of the authority area to allow the department of licensing to implement administration and collection of the fee.

4. Before any authority may impose any of the fees authorized under this section, the authorization for imposition of the fees must be approved by a majority of the qualified electors of the authority area voting.

\[ [2010 c 161 § 901](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/2009-10/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/Senate/6379.SL.pdf?cite=2010%20c%20161%20§%20901); [2002 c 248 § 10](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/2001-02/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/Senate/6464-S.SL.pdf?cite=2002%20c%20248%20§%2010); \]

## 35.95A.100 - Property tax levies.
1. Every authority has the power to impose annual regular property tax levies in an amount equal to one dollar and fifty cents or less per thousand dollars of assessed value of property in the authority area when specifically authorized to do so by a majority of the voters voting on a proposition submitted at a special election or at the regular election of the authority. A proposition authorizing the tax levies will not be submitted by an authority more than twice in any twelve-month period. Ballot propositions must conform with RCW 29A.36.210. The number of years during which the regular levy will be imposed may be limited as specified in the ballot proposition or may be unlimited in duration. In the event an authority is levying property taxes, which in combination with property taxes levied by other taxing districts subject to the limitations provided in RCW 84.52.043 and 84.52.050, exceed these limitations, the authority's property tax levy shall be reduced or eliminated consistent with RCW 84.52.010.

2. The limitation in RCW 84.55.010 does not apply to the first levy imposed under this section following the approval of the levies by the voters under subsection (1) of this section.

\[ [2015 c 53 § 46](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/2015-16/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/House/1806-S.SL.pdf?cite=2015%20c%2053%20§%2046); [2002 c 248 § 11](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/2001-02/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/Senate/6464-S.SL.pdf?cite=2002%20c%20248%20§%2011); \]

## **35.95A.110 - Taxes and fees—Limitation on use.**
All taxes and fees levied and collected by an authority must be used solely for the purpose of paying all or any part of the cost of acquiring, designing, constructing, equipping, maintaining, or operating public **grade-separated** transportation facilities or contracting for the services thereof, or to pay or secure the payment of all or part of the principal of or interest on any general obligation bonds or revenue bonds issued for authority purposes. Until expended, money accumulated in the funds and accounts of an authority may be invested in the manner authorized by the governing body of the authority, consistent with state law.

If any of the revenue from any tax or fee authorized to be levied by an authority has been pledged by the authority to secure the payment of any bonds as herein authorized, then as long as that pledge is in effect the legislature will not withdraw from the authority the authorization to levy and collect the tax or fee.

## **35.95A.120 - Dissolution of authority.**
1.

**Within 30 days of the completion of the construction of the public grade-separated transportation facilities or series of public grade-separated transportation facilities authorized by an authority area, the authority shall reduce day-to-day operations and exist solely as a limited entity that:**

    a. **Oversees the collection of revenue and the payment of debt service or financing still in effect, if any; and**

    b. **Carries out any ongoing requirements related to the continued operation and maintenance of public grade-separated transportation facilities.**

**The authority shall accordingly adjust downward its employees, administration, and overhead expenses. Any taxes, fees, charges, or tolls imposed by the authority be adjusted downward when the financing or debt service on the public grade-separated transportation facilities or series of public grade-separated transportation facilities constructed is completed and paid and notice is provided to the departments administering the taxes. Any excess revenues collected must be disbursed to the participating jurisdictions of the authority in proportion to their population, using population estimates prepared by the office of financial management.**

2. **The authority shall dissolve itself and cease to exist 30 days after:**

    a. **The financing or debt service on the constructed public grade-separated transportation facilities, or series of public grade-separated transportation facilities, is completed and paid;**

    b. **The completion of construction of the public grade-separated transportation facilities, or series of public grade-separated transportation facilities; and**

    c. **Ongoing requirements related to the continued operation and maintenance of public grade-separated transportation facilities ends. If there is no debt outstanding, then the authority shall dissolve within 30 days from:**

        i. **The completion of construction of the public grade-separated transportation facilities, or series of public grade-separated transportation facilities; and**

        ii. **Ongoing requirements related to the continued operation and maintenance of public grade-separated transportation facilities end.**

**Notice of dissolution must be published in newspapers of general circulation within the authority area at least three times in a period of 30 days. Creditors must file claims for payment of claims due within 30 days of the last published notice or the claim is extinguished.**

3. The governing body of the authority may transfer any net assets to one or more other political subdivisions with instructions as to their use or disposition. The governing body shall authorize this transfer **by** resolution .

4. Upon the dissolution and termination of the authority, the former officers, directors, employees, and agents of the authority shall be immune from personal liability in connection with any claims brought against them arising from or relating to **acts or omissions while performing or in good faith purporting to perform their official duties** to the authority, and any claim brought against any of them is barred.

## 35.95A.130 - Special excise tax—Collection.
The special excise tax imposed under RCW 35.95A.080(1) will be collected at the same time and in the same manner as relicensing tab fees under RCW 46.17.350(1) (a), (c), (d), (e), (g), (h), (j), and (n) through (q) and 35.95A.090. Every year on January 1st, April 1st, July 1st, and October 1st the department of licensing shall remit special excise taxes collected on behalf of an authority, back to the authority, at no cost to the authority. Valuation of motor vehicles for purposes of the special excise tax imposed under RCW 35.95A.080(1) must be consistent with chapter 82.44 RCW.

\[ [2010 c 161 § 902](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/2009-10/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/Senate/6379.SL.pdf?cite=2010%20c%20161%20§%20902); [2002 c 248 § 14](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/2001-02/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/Senate/6464-S.SL.pdf?cite=2002%20c%20248%20§%2014); \]

## **35.95A.140 - Requirements for signage.**
Each authority shall incorporate in plans for stations along any **grade-separated** project signing that is easily understood by the traveling public, including, but not limited to, persons with disabilities, non-English-speaking persons, and visitors from other nations. The signage must employ graphics consistent with international symbols for transportation facilities and signage that are consistent with department of transportation guidelines and programs. The signage must also use distinguishing pictograms as a means to identify stations and points of interest along the **grade-separated** corridor for persons who use languages that are not Roman-alphabet based. These requirements are intended to apply to new sign installation and not to existing signs. The authority may replace existing signs as it chooses; however, it shall use the new signing designs when existing signs are replaced. All signage must comply with requirements of applicable federal law and may include recommendations contained in federal publications providing directions on way-finding for persons with disabilities.

## **35.95A.XXX - TBD**
**
1. An authority that imposes a special excise tax under RCW 35.95A.080 or a vehicle license fee under RCW 35.95A.090, may establish a rebate program for the purposes of providing rebates of up to 40 percent of the actual tax or fee paid by a low-income individual.

2. Funds collected from a special excise tax under RCW 35.95A.080 or a vehicle license fee under RCW 35.95A.090 may be used for a rebate program established under this section.

3. An authority that establishes a rebate program is responsible for the development and administration of the program and all functions and costs associated with the rebate program.

4. An authority that establishes a rebate program under this section must report back to the legislature two years after the program takes effect. The report must include, but is not limited to, a detailed description of the structure of the program, the average rebate, the total amount of rebates issued, and the number of people that received rebates.


[ 2021 c XXX § 11; ]**

## **35.95A.XXX - TBD**
**
1. An authority shall create a system plan to implement an equitable transit-oriented development strategy for diverse, vibrant, mixed-use, and mixed-income communities consistent with transit-oriented development plans developed with community input by any regional transportation planning organization or regional transit authority within or encompassing the authority area. This system plan must include the following:

    a. A requirement that when an authority disposes or transfers any surplus property, a minimum of 80 percent of the surplus property to be disposed or transferred, including air rights, that is suitable for development as housing, must be offered for either transfer at no cost, sale, or long-term lease first to qualified entities that agree to develop affordable housing on the property, consistent with local land use and zoning laws:

        i. If a qualified entity receives surplus property from an authority after being offered the property as provided in (a) of this subsection, the authority must require a minimum of 80 percent of the housing units constructed on property obtained under this subsection to be dedicated to affordable housing.

        ii. If a qualified entity sells property or development rights obtained through this subsection, it must use the proceeds from the sale to construct only affordable housing units within one-half miles of the location of the original property;

    b. A requirement that the authority must work in good faith to implement all requirements of this section, but is not required to comply with a requirement imposed by (a)(i) or (ii) of this subsection if the requirement is in conflict, as determined by the relevant federal agency, with provisions of the applicable federal transit administration master grant agreement, federal transit administration full funding grant agreement with the city transportation authority, or the equivalent federal railroad administration agreement necessary to establish or maintain eligibility for a federal grant program;

    c. A requirement that (a) of this subsection does not apply to property to be transferred to governments or third parties in order to facilitate permitting, construction, or mitigation of high capacity transportation facilities and services.

2. A city transportation authority implementing subsection (1)(a) of this section must, at the end of each fiscal quarter, send a report to the appropriate committees of the legislature and post a report on its website detailing the following activities:

    a. Any transfers of property that have occurred in the previous fiscal quarter pursuant to subsection (1)(a) of this section; and

    b. Any progress in implementing any regional equitable transit-oriented development strategy for diverse, vibrant, mixed-use, and mixed-income communities approved by the voters pursuant to this section.


[ 2021 c XXX § 12; ]**

## **35.95A.XXX - TBD**
**
As a condition of receiving state funding, a city transportation authority shall submit a maintenance and preservation management plan for certification by the state department of transportation. The plan must inventory all transportation system assets within the direction and control of the city transportation authority, and provide a plan for preservation of assets based on lowest life-cycle cost methodologies.


[ 2021 c XXX § 13; ]**

## **35.95A.XXX - TBD**
**
1. An authority that imposes a special excise tax under RCW 35.95A.080 or a vehicle license fee under RCW 35.95A.090, may establish a rebate program for the purposes of providing rebates of up to 40 percent of the actual tax or fee paid by a low-income individual.

2. Funds collected from a special excise tax under RCW 35.95A.080 or a vehicle license fee under RCW 35.95A.090 may be used for a rebate program established under this section.

3. An authority that establishes a rebate program is responsible for the development and administration of the program and all functions and costs associated with the rebate program.

4. An authority that establishes a rebate program under this section must report back to the legislature two years after the program takes effect. The report must include, but is not limited to, a detailed description of the structure of the program, the average rebate, the total amount of rebates issued, and the number of people that received rebates.


[ 2021 c XXX § 11; ]**

## **35.95A.XXX - TBD**
**
1. An authority shall create a system plan to implement an equitable transit-oriented development strategy for diverse, vibrant, mixed-use, and mixed-income communities consistent with transit-oriented development plans developed with community input by any regional transportation planning organization or regional transit authority within or encompassing the authority area. This system plan must include the following:

    a. A requirement that when an authority disposes or transfers any surplus property, a minimum of 80 percent of the surplus property to be disposed or transferred, including air rights, that is suitable for development as housing, must be offered for either transfer at no cost, sale, or long-term lease first to qualified entities that agree to develop affordable housing on the property, consistent with local land use and zoning laws:

        i. If a qualified entity receives surplus property from an authority after being offered the property as provided in (a) of this subsection, the authority must require a minimum of 80 percent of the housing units constructed on property obtained under this subsection to be dedicated to affordable housing.

        ii. If a qualified entity sells property or development rights obtained through this subsection, it must use the proceeds from the sale to construct only affordable housing units within one-half miles of the location of the original property;

    b. A requirement that the authority must work in good faith to implement all requirements of this section, but is not required to comply with a requirement imposed by (a)(i) or (ii) of this subsection if the requirement is in conflict, as determined by the relevant federal agency, with provisions of the applicable federal transit administration master grant agreement, federal transit administration full funding grant agreement with the city transportation authority, or the equivalent federal railroad administration agreement necessary to establish or maintain eligibility for a federal grant program;

    c. A requirement that (a) of this subsection does not apply to property to be transferred to governments or third parties in order to facilitate permitting, construction, or mitigation of high capacity transportation facilities and services.

2. A city transportation authority implementing subsection (1)(a) of this section must, at the end of each fiscal quarter, send a report to the appropriate committees of the legislature and post a report on its website detailing the following activities:

    a. Any transfers of property that have occurred in the previous fiscal quarter pursuant to subsection (1)(a) of this section; and

    b. Any progress in implementing any regional equitable transit-oriented development strategy for diverse, vibrant, mixed-use, and mixed-income communities approved by the voters pursuant to this section.


[ 2021 c XXX § 12; ]**

## **35.95A.XXX - TBD**
**
As a condition of receiving state funding, a city transportation authority shall submit a maintenance and preservation management plan for certification by the state department of transportation. The plan must inventory all transportation system assets within the direction and control of the city transportation authority, and provide a plan for preservation of assets based on lowest life-cycle cost methodologies.


[ 2021 c XXX § 13; ]**

## **35.95A.XXX - TBD**
**
1. An authority that imposes a special excise tax under RCW 35.95A.080 or a vehicle license fee under RCW 35.95A.090, may establish a rebate program for the purposes of providing rebates of up to 40 percent of the actual tax or fee paid by a low-income individual.

2. Funds collected from a special excise tax under RCW 35.95A.080 or a vehicle license fee under RCW 35.95A.090 may be used for a rebate program established under this section.

3. An authority that establishes a rebate program is responsible for the development and administration of the program and all functions and costs associated with the rebate program.

4. An authority that establishes a rebate program under this section must report back to the legislature two years after the program takes effect. The report must include, but is not limited to, a detailed description of the structure of the program, the average rebate, the total amount of rebates issued, and the number of people that received rebates.


[ 2021 c XXX § 11; ]**

## **35.95A.XXX - TBD**
**
1. An authority shall create a system plan to implement an equitable transit-oriented development strategy for diverse, vibrant, mixed-use, and mixed-income communities consistent with transit-oriented development plans developed with community input by any regional transportation planning organization or regional transit authority within or encompassing the authority area. This system plan must include the following:

    a. A requirement that when an authority disposes or transfers any surplus property, a minimum of 80 percent of the surplus property to be disposed or transferred, including air rights, that is suitable for development as housing, must be offered for either transfer at no cost, sale, or long-term lease first to qualified entities that agree to develop affordable housing on the property, consistent with local land use and zoning laws:

        i. If a qualified entity receives surplus property from an authority after being offered the property as provided in (a) of this subsection, the authority must require a minimum of 80 percent of the housing units constructed on property obtained under this subsection to be dedicated to affordable housing.

        ii. If a qualified entity sells property or development rights obtained through this subsection, it must use the proceeds from the sale to construct only affordable housing units within one-half miles of the location of the original property;

    b. A requirement that the authority must work in good faith to implement all requirements of this section, but is not required to comply with a requirement imposed by (a)(i) or (ii) of this subsection if the requirement is in conflict, as determined by the relevant federal agency, with provisions of the applicable federal transit administration master grant agreement, federal transit administration full funding grant agreement with the city transportation authority, or the equivalent federal railroad administration agreement necessary to establish or maintain eligibility for a federal grant program;

    c. A requirement that (a) of this subsection does not apply to property to be transferred to governments or third parties in order to facilitate permitting, construction, or mitigation of high capacity transportation facilities and services.

2. A city transportation authority implementing subsection (1)(a) of this section must, at the end of each fiscal quarter, send a report to the appropriate committees of the legislature and post a report on its website detailing the following activities:

    a. Any transfers of property that have occurred in the previous fiscal quarter pursuant to subsection (1)(a) of this section; and

    b. Any progress in implementing any regional equitable transit-oriented development strategy for diverse, vibrant, mixed-use, and mixed-income communities approved by the voters pursuant to this section.


[ 2021 c XXX § 12; ]**

## **35.95A.XXX - TBD**
**
As a condition of receiving state funding, a city transportation authority shall submit a maintenance and preservation management plan for certification by the state department of transportation. The plan must inventory all transportation system assets within the direction and control of the city transportation authority, and provide a plan for preservation of assets based on lowest life-cycle cost methodologies.


[ 2021 c XXX § 13; ]**

## **35.95A.XXX - TBD**
**
1. An authority that imposes a special excise tax under RCW 35.95A.080 or a vehicle license fee under RCW 35.95A.090, may establish a rebate program for the purposes of providing rebates of up to 40 percent of the actual tax or fee paid by a low-income individual.

2. Funds collected from a special excise tax under RCW 35.95A.080 or a vehicle license fee under RCW 35.95A.090 may be used for a rebate program established under this section.

3. An authority that establishes a rebate program is responsible for the development and administration of the program and all functions and costs associated with the rebate program.

4. An authority that establishes a rebate program under this section must report back to the legislature two years after the program takes effect. The report must include, but is not limited to, a detailed description of the structure of the program, the average rebate, the total amount of rebates issued, and the number of people that received rebates.


[ 2021 c XXX § 11; ]**

## **35.95A.XXX - TBD**
**
1. An authority shall create a system plan to implement an equitable transit-oriented development strategy for diverse, vibrant, mixed-use, and mixed-income communities consistent with transit-oriented development plans developed with community input by any regional transportation planning organization or regional transit authority within or encompassing the authority area. This system plan must include the following:

    a. A requirement that when an authority disposes or transfers any surplus property, a minimum of 80 percent of the surplus property to be disposed or transferred, including air rights, that is suitable for development as housing, must be offered for either transfer at no cost, sale, or long-term lease first to qualified entities that agree to develop affordable housing on the property, consistent with local land use and zoning laws:

        i. If a qualified entity receives surplus property from an authority after being offered the property as provided in (a) of this subsection, the authority must require a minimum of 80 percent of the housing units constructed on property obtained under this subsection to be dedicated to affordable housing.

        ii. If a qualified entity sells property or development rights obtained through this subsection, it must use the proceeds from the sale to construct only affordable housing units within one-half miles of the location of the original property;

    b. A requirement that the authority must work in good faith to implement all requirements of this section, but is not required to comply with a requirement imposed by (a)(i) or (ii) of this subsection if the requirement is in conflict, as determined by the relevant federal agency, with provisions of the applicable federal transit administration master grant agreement, federal transit administration full funding grant agreement with the city transportation authority, or the equivalent federal railroad administration agreement necessary to establish or maintain eligibility for a federal grant program;

    c. A requirement that (a) of this subsection does not apply to property to be transferred to governments or third parties in order to facilitate permitting, construction, or mitigation of high capacity transportation facilities and services.

2. A city transportation authority implementing subsection (1)(a) of this section must, at the end of each fiscal quarter, send a report to the appropriate committees of the legislature and post a report on its website detailing the following activities:

    a. Any transfers of property that have occurred in the previous fiscal quarter pursuant to subsection (1)(a) of this section; and

    b. Any progress in implementing any regional equitable transit-oriented development strategy for diverse, vibrant, mixed-use, and mixed-income communities approved by the voters pursuant to this section.


[ 2021 c XXX § 12; ]**

## **35.95A.XXX - TBD**
**
As a condition of receiving state funding, a city transportation authority shall submit a maintenance and preservation management plan for certification by the state department of transportation. The plan must inventory all transportation system assets within the direction and control of the city transportation authority, and provide a plan for preservation of assets based on lowest life-cycle cost methodologies.


[ 2021 c XXX § 13; ]**

## **35.95A.XXX - TBD**
**
1. An authority that imposes a special excise tax under RCW 35.95A.080 or a vehicle license fee under RCW 35.95A.090, may establish a rebate program for the purposes of providing rebates of up to 40 percent of the actual tax or fee paid by a low-income individual.

2. Funds collected from a special excise tax under RCW 35.95A.080 or a vehicle license fee under RCW 35.95A.090 may be used for a rebate program established under this section.

3. An authority that establishes a rebate program is responsible for the development and administration of the program and all functions and costs associated with the rebate program.

4. An authority that establishes a rebate program under this section must report back to the legislature two years after the program takes effect. The report must include, but is not limited to, a detailed description of the structure of the program, the average rebate, the total amount of rebates issued, and the number of people that received rebates.


[ 2021 c XXX § 11; ]**

## **35.95A.XXX - TBD**
**
1. An authority shall create a system plan to implement an equitable transit-oriented development strategy for diverse, vibrant, mixed-use, and mixed-income communities consistent with transit-oriented development plans developed with community input by any regional transportation planning organization or regional transit authority within or encompassing the authority area. This system plan must include the following:

    a. A requirement that when an authority disposes or transfers any surplus property, a minimum of 80 percent of the surplus property to be disposed or transferred, including air rights, that is suitable for development as housing, must be offered for either transfer at no cost, sale, or long-term lease first to qualified entities that agree to develop affordable housing on the property, consistent with local land use and zoning laws:

        i. If a qualified entity receives surplus property from an authority after being offered the property as provided in (a) of this subsection, the authority must require a minimum of 80 percent of the housing units constructed on property obtained under this subsection to be dedicated to affordable housing.

        ii. If a qualified entity sells property or development rights obtained through this subsection, it must use the proceeds from the sale to construct only affordable housing units within one-half miles of the location of the original property;

    b. A requirement that the authority must work in good faith to implement all requirements of this section, but is not required to comply with a requirement imposed by (a)(i) or (ii) of this subsection if the requirement is in conflict, as determined by the relevant federal agency, with provisions of the applicable federal transit administration master grant agreement, federal transit administration full funding grant agreement with the city transportation authority, or the equivalent federal railroad administration agreement necessary to establish or maintain eligibility for a federal grant program;

    c. A requirement that (a) of this subsection does not apply to property to be transferred to governments or third parties in order to facilitate permitting, construction, or mitigation of high capacity transportation facilities and services.

2. A city transportation authority implementing subsection (1)(a) of this section must, at the end of each fiscal quarter, send a report to the appropriate committees of the legislature and post a report on its website detailing the following activities:

    a. Any transfers of property that have occurred in the previous fiscal quarter pursuant to subsection (1)(a) of this section; and

    b. Any progress in implementing any regional equitable transit-oriented development strategy for diverse, vibrant, mixed-use, and mixed-income communities approved by the voters pursuant to this section.


[ 2021 c XXX § 12; ]**

## **35.95A.XXX - TBD**
**
As a condition of receiving state funding, a city transportation authority shall submit a maintenance and preservation management plan for certification by the state department of transportation. The plan must inventory all transportation system assets within the direction and control of the city transportation authority, and provide a plan for preservation of assets based on lowest life-cycle cost methodologies.


[ 2021 c XXX § 13; ]**

## **35.95A.XXX - TBD**
**
1. An authority that imposes a special excise tax under RCW 35.95A.080 or a vehicle license fee under RCW 35.95A.090, may establish a rebate program for the purposes of providing rebates of up to 40 percent of the actual tax or fee paid by a low-income individual.

2. Funds collected from a special excise tax under RCW 35.95A.080 or a vehicle license fee under RCW 35.95A.090 may be used for a rebate program established under this section.

3. An authority that establishes a rebate program is responsible for the development and administration of the program and all functions and costs associated with the rebate program.

4. An authority that establishes a rebate program under this section must report back to the legislature two years after the program takes effect. The report must include, but is not limited to, a detailed description of the structure of the program, the average rebate, the total amount of rebates issued, and the number of people that received rebates.


[ 2021 c XXX § 11; ]**

## **35.95A.XXX - TBD**
**
1. An authority shall create a system plan to implement an equitable transit-oriented development strategy for diverse, vibrant, mixed-use, and mixed-income communities consistent with transit-oriented development plans developed with community input by any regional transportation planning organization or regional transit authority within or encompassing the authority area. This system plan must include the following:

    a. A requirement that when an authority disposes or transfers any surplus property, a minimum of 80 percent of the surplus property to be disposed or transferred, including air rights, that is suitable for development as housing, must be offered for either transfer at no cost, sale, or long-term lease first to qualified entities that agree to develop affordable housing on the property, consistent with local land use and zoning laws:

        i. If a qualified entity receives surplus property from an authority after being offered the property as provided in (a) of this subsection, the authority must require a minimum of 80 percent of the housing units constructed on property obtained under this subsection to be dedicated to affordable housing.

        ii. If a qualified entity sells property or development rights obtained through this subsection, it must use the proceeds from the sale to construct only affordable housing units within one-half miles of the location of the original property;

    b. A requirement that the authority must work in good faith to implement all requirements of this section, but is not required to comply with a requirement imposed by (a)(i) or (ii) of this subsection if the requirement is in conflict, as determined by the relevant federal agency, with provisions of the applicable federal transit administration master grant agreement, federal transit administration full funding grant agreement with the city transportation authority, or the equivalent federal railroad administration agreement necessary to establish or maintain eligibility for a federal grant program;

    c. A requirement that (a) of this subsection does not apply to property to be transferred to governments or third parties in order to facilitate permitting, construction, or mitigation of high capacity transportation facilities and services.

2. A city transportation authority implementing subsection (1)(a) of this section must, at the end of each fiscal quarter, send a report to the appropriate committees of the legislature and post a report on its website detailing the following activities:

    a. Any transfers of property that have occurred in the previous fiscal quarter pursuant to subsection (1)(a) of this section; and

    b. Any progress in implementing any regional equitable transit-oriented development strategy for diverse, vibrant, mixed-use, and mixed-income communities approved by the voters pursuant to this section.


[ 2021 c XXX § 12; ]**

## **35.95A.XXX - TBD**
**
As a condition of receiving state funding, a city transportation authority shall submit a maintenance and preservation management plan for certification by the state department of transportation. The plan must inventory all transportation system assets within the direction and control of the city transportation authority, and provide a plan for preservation of assets based on lowest life-cycle cost methodologies.


[ 2021 c XXX § 13; ]**

## **35.95A.XXX - TBD**
**
1. An authority that imposes a special excise tax under RCW 35.95A.080 or a vehicle license fee under RCW 35.95A.090, may establish a rebate program for the purposes of providing rebates of up to 40 percent of the actual tax or fee paid by a low-income individual.

2. Funds collected from a special excise tax under RCW 35.95A.080 or a vehicle license fee under RCW 35.95A.090 may be used for a rebate program established under this section.

3. An authority that establishes a rebate program is responsible for the development and administration of the program and all functions and costs associated with the rebate program.

4. An authority that establishes a rebate program under this section must report back to the legislature two years after the program takes effect. The report must include, but is not limited to, a detailed description of the structure of the program, the average rebate, the total amount of rebates issued, and the number of people that received rebates.


[ 2021 c XXX § 11; ]**

## **35.95A.XXX - TBD**
**
1. An authority shall create a system plan to implement an equitable transit-oriented development strategy for diverse, vibrant, mixed-use, and mixed-income communities consistent with transit-oriented development plans developed with community input by any regional transportation planning organization or regional transit authority within or encompassing the authority area. This system plan must include the following:

    a. A requirement that when an authority disposes or transfers any surplus property, a minimum of 80 percent of the surplus property to be disposed or transferred, including air rights, that is suitable for development as housing, must be offered for either transfer at no cost, sale, or long-term lease first to qualified entities that agree to develop affordable housing on the property, consistent with local land use and zoning laws:

        i. If a qualified entity receives surplus property from an authority after being offered the property as provided in (a) of this subsection, the authority must require a minimum of 80 percent of the housing units constructed on property obtained under this subsection to be dedicated to affordable housing.

        ii. If a qualified entity sells property or development rights obtained through this subsection, it must use the proceeds from the sale to construct only affordable housing units within one-half miles of the location of the original property;

    b. A requirement that the authority must work in good faith to implement all requirements of this section, but is not required to comply with a requirement imposed by (a)(i) or (ii) of this subsection if the requirement is in conflict, as determined by the relevant federal agency, with provisions of the applicable federal transit administration master grant agreement, federal transit administration full funding grant agreement with the city transportation authority, or the equivalent federal railroad administration agreement necessary to establish or maintain eligibility for a federal grant program;

    c. A requirement that (a) of this subsection does not apply to property to be transferred to governments or third parties in order to facilitate permitting, construction, or mitigation of high capacity transportation facilities and services.

2. A city transportation authority implementing subsection (1)(a) of this section must, at the end of each fiscal quarter, send a report to the appropriate committees of the legislature and post a report on its website detailing the following activities:

    a. Any transfers of property that have occurred in the previous fiscal quarter pursuant to subsection (1)(a) of this section; and

    b. Any progress in implementing any regional equitable transit-oriented development strategy for diverse, vibrant, mixed-use, and mixed-income communities approved by the voters pursuant to this section.


[ 2021 c XXX § 12; ]**

## **35.95A.XXX - TBD**
**
As a condition of receiving state funding, a city transportation authority shall submit a maintenance and preservation management plan for certification by the state department of transportation. The plan must inventory all transportation system assets within the direction and control of the city transportation authority, and provide a plan for preservation of assets based on lowest life-cycle cost methodologies.


[ 2021 c XXX § 13; ]**

## **35.95A.XXX - TBD**
**
1. An authority that imposes a special excise tax under RCW 35.95A.080 or a vehicle license fee under RCW 35.95A.090, may establish a rebate program for the purposes of providing rebates of up to 40 percent of the actual tax or fee paid by a low-income individual.

2. Funds collected from a special excise tax under RCW 35.95A.080 or a vehicle license fee under RCW 35.95A.090 may be used for a rebate program established under this section.

3. An authority that establishes a rebate program is responsible for the development and administration of the program and all functions and costs associated with the rebate program.

4. An authority that establishes a rebate program under this section must report back to the legislature two years after the program takes effect. The report must include, but is not limited to, a detailed description of the structure of the program, the average rebate, the total amount of rebates issued, and the number of people that received rebates.


[ 2021 c XXX § 11; ]**

## **35.95A.XXX - TBD**
**
1. An authority shall create a system plan to implement an equitable transit-oriented development strategy for diverse, vibrant, mixed-use, and mixed-income communities consistent with transit-oriented development plans developed with community input by any regional transportation planning organization or regional transit authority within or encompassing the authority area. This system plan must include the following:

    a. A requirement that when an authority disposes or transfers any surplus property, a minimum of 80 percent of the surplus property to be disposed or transferred, including air rights, that is suitable for development as housing, must be offered for either transfer at no cost, sale, or long-term lease first to qualified entities that agree to develop affordable housing on the property, consistent with local land use and zoning laws:

        i. If a qualified entity receives surplus property from an authority after being offered the property as provided in (a) of this subsection, the authority must require a minimum of 80 percent of the housing units constructed on property obtained under this subsection to be dedicated to affordable housing.

        ii. If a qualified entity sells property or development rights obtained through this subsection, it must use the proceeds from the sale to construct only affordable housing units within one-half miles of the location of the original property;

    b. A requirement that the authority must work in good faith to implement all requirements of this section, but is not required to comply with a requirement imposed by (a)(i) or (ii) of this subsection if the requirement is in conflict, as determined by the relevant federal agency, with provisions of the applicable federal transit administration master grant agreement, federal transit administration full funding grant agreement with the city transportation authority, or the equivalent federal railroad administration agreement necessary to establish or maintain eligibility for a federal grant program;

    c. A requirement that (a) of this subsection does not apply to property to be transferred to governments or third parties in order to facilitate permitting, construction, or mitigation of high capacity transportation facilities and services.

2. A city transportation authority implementing subsection (1)(a) of this section must, at the end of each fiscal quarter, send a report to the appropriate committees of the legislature and post a report on its website detailing the following activities:

    a. Any transfers of property that have occurred in the previous fiscal quarter pursuant to subsection (1)(a) of this section; and

    b. Any progress in implementing any regional equitable transit-oriented development strategy for diverse, vibrant, mixed-use, and mixed-income communities approved by the voters pursuant to this section.


[ 2021 c XXX § 12; ]**

## **35.95A.XXX - TBD**
**
As a condition of receiving state funding, a city transportation authority shall submit a maintenance and preservation management plan for certification by the state department of transportation. The plan must inventory all transportation system assets within the direction and control of the city transportation authority, and provide a plan for preservation of assets based on lowest life-cycle cost methodologies.


[ 2021 c XXX § 13; ]**
