# 1.20 - General provisions.
* [1.20.010 - State flag.](#120010---state-flag)
* [1.20.015 - Display of national and state flags.](#120015---display-of-national-and-state-flags)
* [1.20.017 - Display of national league of families' POW/MIA flag.](#120017---display-of-national-league-of-families-powmia-flag)
* [1.20.020 - State tree.](#120020---state-tree)
* [1.20.025 - State grass.](#120025---state-grass)
* [1.20.030 - State flower.](#120030---state-flower)
* [1.20.035 - State fruit.](#120035---state-fruit)
* [1.20.037 - State marine mammal.](#120037---state-marine-mammal)
* [1.20.038 - State endemic mammal.](#120038---state-endemic-mammal)
* [1.20.040 - State bird.](#120040---state-bird)
* [1.20.042 - State fossil.](#120042---state-fossil)
* [1.20.045 - State fish.](#120045---state-fish)
* [1.20.047 - State insect.](#120047---state-insect)
* [1.20.050 - Standard time—Daylight saving time. (Contingent repeal.)](#120050---standard-timedaylight-saving-time-contingent-repeal)
* [1.20.051 - Daylight saving time. (Contingent repeal.)](#120051---daylight-saving-time-contingent-repeal)
* [1.20.052 - Permanent daylight saving time—Intent. (Contingent repeal.)](#120052---permanent-daylight-saving-timeintent-contingent-repeal)
* [1.20.055 - Pacific daylight time. (Contingent effective date.)](#120055---pacific-daylight-time-contingent-effective-date)
* [1.20.060 - Arbor day.](#120060---arbor-day)
* [1.20.070 - State song.](#120070---state-song)
* [1.20.071 - State song—Proceeds from sale.](#120071---state-songproceeds-from-sale)
* [1.20.073 - State folk song.](#120073---state-folk-song)
* [1.20.075 - State dance.](#120075---state-dance)
* [1.20.080 - State seal.](#120080---state-seal)
* [1.20.090 - State gem.](#120090---state-gem)
* [1.20.100 - Diverse cultures and languages encouraged—State policy.](#120100---diverse-cultures-and-languages-encouragedstate-policy)
* [1.20.110 - State tartan.](#120110---state-tartan)
* [1.20.120 - State arboretum.](#120120---state-arboretum)
* [1.20.130 - Preferred terminology in government documents.](#120130---preferred-terminology-in-government-documents)
* [1.20.140 - State vegetable.](#120140---state-vegetable)
* [1.20.150 - State amphibian.](#120150---state-amphibian)
* [1.20.160 - State ship.](#120160---state-ship)
* [1.20.170 - State waterfall.](#120170---state-waterfall)
* [1.20.180 - State oyster.](#120180---state-oyster)
* [1.20.190 - Purple heart state.](#120190---purple-heart-state)
## 1.20.010 - State flag.
The official flag of the state of Washington shall be of dark green silk or bunting and shall bear in its center a reproduction of the seal of the state of Washington embroidered, printed, painted or stamped thereon. The edges of the flag may, or may not, be fringed. If a fringe is used the same shall be of gold or yellow color of the same shade as the seal. The dimensions of the flag may vary.

The secretary of state is authorized to provide the state flag to units of the armed forces, without charge therefor, as in his or her discretion he or she deems entitled thereto. The secretary of state is further authorized to sell the state flag to any citizen at a price to be determined by the secretary of state.

\[ [2011 c 336 § 7](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/2011-12/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/Senate/5045.SL.pdf?cite=2011%20c%20336%20§%207); [1967 ex.s. c 65 § 2](http://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1967ex1c65.pdf?cite=1967%20ex.s.%20c%2065%20§%202); [1925 ex.s. c 85 § 1](http://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1925ex1c85.pdf?cite=1925%20ex.s.%20c%2085%20§%201); [1923 c 174 § 1](http://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1923c174.pdf?cite=1923%20c%20174%20§%201); RRS § 10964-1, RRS vol. 11, p. 399; \]

## 1.20.015 - Display of national and state flags.
The flag of the United States and the flag of the state shall be prominently installed, displayed and maintained in schools, court rooms and state buildings.

\[ [1955 c 88 § 1](http://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1955c88.pdf?cite=1955%20c%2088%20§%201); \]

## 1.20.017 - Display of national league of families' POW/MIA flag.
1. Each public entity must display the national league of families' POW/MIA flag along with the flag of the United States and the flag of the state upon or near the principal building of the public entity on the following days: (a) Former Prisoners of War Recognition Day on April 9th; (b) Welcome Home Vietnam Veterans Day on March 30; (c) Armed Forces Day on the third Saturday in May; (d) Memorial Day on the last Monday in May; (e) Flag Day on June 14; (f) Independence Day on July 4; (g) National Korean War Veterans Armistice Day on July 27; (h) National POW/MIA Recognition Day on the third Friday in September; (i) Veterans' Day on November 11th; and (j) Pearl Harbor Remembrance Day on December 7th. If the designated day falls on a Saturday or Sunday, then the POW/MIA flag must be displayed on the preceding Friday.

2. The governor's veterans affairs advisory committee must provide information to public entities regarding the purchase and display of the POW/MIA flag upon request.

3. As used in this section, "public entity" means every state agency, including each institution of higher education, and every county, city, and town.

\[ [2017 c 79 § 1](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/2017-18/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/House/1204.SL.pdf?cite=2017%20c%2079%20§%201); [2013 c 5 § 2](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/2013-14/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/House/1319.SL.pdf?cite=2013%20c%205%20§%202); [2012 c 11 § 2](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/2011-12/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/House/2138.SL.pdf?cite=2012%20c%2011%20§%202); [2002 c 293 § 1](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/2001-02/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/Senate/5097-S.SL.pdf?cite=2002%20c%20293%20§%201); \]

## 1.20.020 - State tree.
That certain evergreen tree known and described as the western hemlock (Tsuga heterophylla) is hereby designated as the official tree of the state of Washington.

\[ [1947 c 191 § 1](http://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1947c191.pdf?cite=1947%20c%20191%20§%201); Rem. Supp. 1947 § 10964-120; \]

## 1.20.025 - State grass.
Agropyron spicatum, the species of natural grass commonly called "bluebunch wheatgrass," is hereby designated as the official grass of the state of Washington.

\[ [1989 c 354 § 62](http://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1989c354.pdf?cite=1989%20c%20354%20§%2062); \]

## 1.20.030 - State flower.
The native species, Rhododendron macrophyllum, is hereby designated as the official flower of the state of Washington.

\[ [1959 c 29 § 1](http://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1959c29.pdf?cite=1959%20c%2029%20§%201); [1949 c 18 § 1](http://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1949c18.pdf?cite=1949%20c%2018%20§%201); Rem. Supp. 1949 § 10964-200; \]

## 1.20.035 - State fruit.
The official fruit of the state of Washington is the apple.

\[ [1989 c 354 § 63](http://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1989c354.pdf?cite=1989%20c%20354%20§%2063); \]

## 1.20.037 - State marine mammal.
The orca, Orcinus orca, is hereby designated as the official marine mammal of the state of Washington.

\[ [2005 c 51 § 2](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/2005-06/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/House/1759.SL.pdf?cite=2005%20c%2051%20§%202); \]

## 1.20.038 - State endemic mammal.
The Olympic marmot, Marmota olympus, is hereby designated as the official endemic mammal of the state of Washington.

\[ [2009 c 464 § 2](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/2009-10/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/Senate/5071.SL.pdf?cite=2009%20c%20464%20§%202); \]

## 1.20.040 - State bird.
The willow goldfinch is hereby designated as the official bird of the state of Washington.

\[ [1951 c 249 § 1](http://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1951c249.pdf?cite=1951%20c%20249%20§%201); \]

## 1.20.042 - State fossil.
The Columbian mammoth of North America, Mammuthus columbi, is hereby designated as the official fossil of the state of Washington.

\[ [1998 c 129 § 2](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/1997-98/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/House/1088-S.SL.pdf?cite=1998%20c%20129%20§%202); \]

## 1.20.045 - State fish.
The species of trout commonly called "steelhead trout" (Salmo gairdnerii) is hereby designated as the official fish of the state of Washington.

\[ [1969 c 36 § 1](http://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1969c36.pdf?cite=1969%20c%2036%20§%201); \]

## 1.20.047 - State insect.
The common green darner dragonfly, Anax junius drury, is hereby designated as the official insect of the state of Washington.

\[ [1997 c 6 § 2](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/1997-98/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/House/1320-S.SL.pdf?cite=1997%20c%206%20§%202); \]

## 1.20.050 - Standard time—Daylight saving time. (Contingent repeal.)
No county, city or other political subdivision of this state shall adopt any provision for the observance of daylight saving time, or any time other than standard, except pursuant to a gubernatorial proclamation declaring an emergency during a period of national war and authorizing such adoption, or unless other than standard time is established on a national basis: PROVIDED, That this section shall not apply to orders made by federal authorities in a local area entirely under federal control.

\[ 1953 c 2 § 1 (Initiative Measure No. 181, approved November 4, 1952); \]

## 1.20.051 - Daylight saving time. (Contingent repeal.)
At two o'clock antemeridian Pacific Standard Time of the second Sunday in March each year the time of the state of Washington shall be advanced one hour, and at two o'clock antemeridian Pacific Standard Time of the first Sunday in November in each year the time of the state of Washington shall, by the retarding of one hour, be returned to Pacific Standard Time.

\[ [2018 c 22 § 2](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/2017-18/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/House/2368.SL.pdf?cite=2018%20c%2022%20§%202); [1963 c 14 § 1](http://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1963c14.pdf?cite=1963%20c%2014%20§%201); 1961 c 3 § 1 (Initiative Measure No. 210, approved November 8, 1960); \]

## 1.20.052 - Permanent daylight saving time—Intent. (Contingent repeal.)
Under federal law as it exists on July 28, 2019, states are not permitted to observe daylight saving time year-round. If the United States congress amends federal law to authorize states to observe daylight saving time year-round, the legislature intends that Washington state make daylight saving time the permanent time of the state and all of its political subdivisions.

\[ [2019 c 297 § 1](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/2019-20/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/House/1196-S.SL.pdf?cite=2019%20c%20297%20§%201); \]

## 1.20.055 - Pacific daylight time. (Contingent effective date.)
1. The time of the state of Washington and all of its political subdivisions is Pacific daylight time throughout the calendar year, as determined by reference to coordinated universal time.

2. Pacific daylight time within the state is that of the fifth zone designated by federal law as Pacific Standard Time, 15 U.S.C. Secs. 261 and 263, advanced by one hour.

\[ [2019 c 297 § 2](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/2019-20/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/House/1196-S.SL.pdf?cite=2019%20c%20297%20§%202); \]

## 1.20.060 - Arbor day.
The second Wednesday in April of each year is designated as Arbor day.

\[ [1957 c 220 § 1](http://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1957c220.pdf?cite=1957%20c%20220%20§%201); \]

## 1.20.070 - State song.
The song, music and lyrics, "Washington My Home", composed by Helen Davis, is hereby designated as the official song of the state of Washington.

\[ [1959 c 281 § 1](http://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1959c281.pdf?cite=1959%20c%20281%20§%201); \]

## 1.20.071 - State song—Proceeds from sale.
All proceeds from the sale of the official song of the state as designated in RCW 1.20.070 shall be placed in the general fund.

\[ [1973 1st ex.s. c 59 § 1](http://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1973ex1c59.pdf?cite=1973%201st%20ex.s.%20c%2059%20§%201); [1959 c 281 § 2](http://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1959c281.pdf?cite=1959%20c%20281%20§%202); \]

## 1.20.073 - State folk song.
The legislature recognizes that winter recreational activities are part of the folk tradition of the state of Washington. Winter recreational activities serve to turn the darkness of a northwest winter into the dawn of renewed vitality. As the winter snows dissolve into the torrents of spring, the Columbia river is nourished. The Columbia river is the pride of the northwest and the unifying geographic element of the state. In order to celebrate the river which ties the winter recreation playground of snowcapped mountains and the Yakima, Snake, and the Klickitat rivers to the ocean so blue, the legislature declares that the official state folk song is "Roll On Columbia, Roll On," composed by Woody Guthrie.

\[ [1987 c 526 § 4](http://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1987c526.pdf?cite=1987%20c%20526%20§%204); \]

## 1.20.075 - State dance.
The square dance is designated as the official dance of the state of Washington.

\[ [1979 ex.s. c 10 § 1](http://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1979ex1c10.pdf?cite=1979%20ex.s.%20c%2010%20§%201); \]

## 1.20.080 - State seal.
The seal of the state of Washington shall be, a seal encircled with the words: "The Seal of the State of Washington," with the vignette of General George Washington as the central figure, and beneath the vignette the figures "1889" and shall be composed as appears in the illustration below:





\[ [1967 ex.s. c 65 § 1](http://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1967ex1c65.pdf?cite=1967%20ex.s.%20c%2065%20§%201); \]

## 1.20.090 - State gem.
Petrified wood is hereby designated as the official gem of the state of Washington.

\[ [1975 c 8 § 1](http://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1975c8.pdf?cite=1975%20c%208%20§%201); \]

## 1.20.100 - Diverse cultures and languages encouraged—State policy.
The legislature finds that:

1. Diverse ethnic and linguistic communities have contributed to the social and economic prosperity of Washington state;

2. It is the welcomed responsibility and opportunity of this state to respect and facilitate the efforts of all cultural, ethnic, and linguistic segments of the population to become full participants in Washington communities;

3. This state's economic well-being depends heavily on foreign trade and international exchange and more than one out of six jobs is directly linked to foreign trade and international exchange;

4. If Washington is to prosper in foreign trade and international exchange, it must have citizens that are multilingual and multicultural;

5. While recognizing the value of a multilingual background, the state also encourages all citizens to become proficient in English to facilitate full participation of all groups into society and to promote cross-communication between multilingual groups; and

6. The multilingual nature of communication that currently exists in this state should be promoted to build trust and understanding among all of its citizens.

Therefore, it shall be the policy of the state of Washington to welcome and encourage the presence of diverse cultures and the use of diverse languages in business, government, and private affairs in this state.

\[ [1989 c 236 § 1](http://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1989c236.pdf?cite=1989%20c%20236%20§%201); \]

## 1.20.110 - State tartan.
The Washington state tartan is hereby designated. The tartan shall have a pattern of colors, called a sett, that is made up of a green background with stripes of blue, white, yellow, red, and black. The secretary of state shall register the tartan with the Scottish Register of Tartans.

\[ [2019 c 64 § 2](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/2019-20/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/House/1091-S.SL.pdf?cite=2019%20c%2064%20§%202); [1991 c 62 § 1](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/1991-92/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/Senate/5047.SL.pdf?cite=1991%20c%2062%20§%201); \]

## 1.20.120 - State arboretum.
The Washington park arboretum is hereby designated as an official arboretum of the state of Washington.

\[ [1995 c 82 § 2](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/1995-96/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/Senate/5410-S.SL.pdf?cite=1995%20c%2082%20§%202); \]

## 1.20.130 - Preferred terminology in government documents.
1. All state and local government statutes, codes, rules, regulations, and other official documents enacted after July 1, 2002, are required to use the term "Asian" when referring to persons of Asian descent. The use of the term "Oriental" is prohibited.

2. The legislature urges all state and local entities to review their statutes, codes, rules, regulations, and other official documents and revise them to omit the use of the term "Oriental" when referring to persons of Asian descent.

\[ [2002 c 307 § 2](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/2001-02/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/Senate/5954.SL.pdf?cite=2002%20c%20307%20§%202); \]

## 1.20.140 - State vegetable.
The Walla Walla sweet onion is designated as the official vegetable of the state of Washington.

\[ [2007 c 137 § 1](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/2007-08/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/House/1556.SL.pdf?cite=2007%20c%20137%20§%201); \]

## 1.20.150 - State amphibian.
The Pacific chorus frog, Pseudacris regilla, is hereby designated as the official amphibian of the state of Washington.

\[ [2007 c 224 § 1](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/2007-08/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/House/1069.SL.pdf?cite=2007%20c%20224%20§%201); \]

## 1.20.160 - State ship.
The Lady Washington is hereby designated as the official ship of the state of Washington.

\[ [2007 c 351 § 1](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/2007-08/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/House/1084.SL.pdf?cite=2007%20c%20351%20§%201); \]

## 1.20.170 - State waterfall.
Palouse falls is hereby designated as the official waterfall of the state of Washington.

\[ [2014 c 41 § 2](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/2013-14/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/House/2119.SL.pdf?cite=2014%20c%2041%20§%202); \]

## 1.20.180 - State oyster.
The Ostrea lurida is hereby designated the official oyster of the state of Washington. This native oyster species plays an important role in the history and culture that surrounds shellfish in Washington state and along the west coast of the United States. Some of the common and historic names used for this species are Native, Western, Shoalwater, and Olympia.

\[ [2014 c 146 § 2](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/2013-14/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/Senate/6145-S.SL.pdf?cite=2014%20c%20146%20§%202); \]

## 1.20.190 - Purple heart state.
Washington state is designated a purple heart state that honors people who have received the purple heart award.

\[ [2021 c 213 § 2](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/2021-22/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/House/1250-S.SL.pdf?cite=2021%20c%20213%20§%202); \]


## **1.20.XXX - TBD**
**
"The Evergreen State" is designated as the official nickname of the state of Washington.


[ 2021 c XXX § 1; ]**

## **1.20.XXX - TBD**
**
"The Evergreen State" is designated as the official nickname of the state of Washington.


[ 2021 c XXX § 1; ]**
