# 57.28 - Withdrawal of territory.
* [57.28.001 - Actions subject to review by boundary review board.](#5728001---actions-subject-to-review-by-boundary-review-board)
* [57.28.010 - Withdrawal authorized—Petition.](#5728010---withdrawal-authorizedpetition)
* [57.28.020 - Petition of residents.](#5728020---petition-of-residents)
* [57.28.030 - Petition of landowners.](#5728030---petition-of-landowners)
* [57.28.035 - Alternative procedure—Resolution.](#5728035---alternative-procedureresolution)
* [57.28.040 - Notice of hearing—Bond for costs.](#5728040---notice-of-hearingbond-for-costs)
* [57.28.050 - Hearing—Findings.](#5728050---hearingfindings)
* [57.28.060 - Transmission to county legislative authorities.](#5728060---transmission-to-county-legislative-authorities)
* [57.28.070 - Notice of hearing before county legislative authority.](#5728070---notice-of-hearing-before-county-legislative-authority)
* [57.28.080 - Hearing—Findings.](#5728080---hearingfindings)
* [57.28.090 - Election on withdrawal.](#5728090---election-on-withdrawal)
* [57.28.100 - Notice of election—Election—Canvass.](#5728100---notice-of-electionelectioncanvass)
* [57.28.110 - Taxes and assessments unaffected.](#5728110---taxes-and-assessments-unaffected)
## 57.28.001 - Actions subject to review by boundary review board.
Actions taken under this chapter may be subject to potential review by a boundary review board under chapter 36.93 RCW.

\[ [1996 c 230 § 1001](https://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/1995-96/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/Senate/6091-S.SL.pdf?cite=1996%20c%20230%20§%201001); [1989 c 84 § 59](https://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1989c84.pdf?cite=1989%20c%2084%20§%2059); \]

## 57.28.010 - Withdrawal authorized—Petition.
Territory within a district may be withdrawn therefrom in the following manner and upon the following conditions: The petition for withdrawal shall be in writing and shall designate the boundaries of the territory proposed to be withdrawn from the district and shall be signed by at least twenty-five percent of the qualified voters residing within the territory so designated who are qualified voters on the date of filing such petition. The petition shall set forth that the territory proposed to be withdrawn is of such location or character that water and sewer services cannot be furnished to it by the district at reasonable cost, and shall further set forth that the withdrawal of such territory will be of benefit to such territory and conducive to the general welfare of the balance of the district.

\[ [1996 c 230 § 1002](https://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/1995-96/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/Senate/6091-S.SL.pdf?cite=1996%20c%20230%20§%201002); [1941 c 55 § 1](https://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1941c55.pdf?cite=1941%20c%2055%20§%201); Rem. Supp. 1941 § 11604-1; \]

## 57.28.020 - Petition of residents.
The petition for withdrawal shall be filed with the county auditor of each county in which the district is located, and after the filing no person having signed the petition shall be allowed to withdraw the person's name therefrom. Within ten days after such filing, each county auditor shall examine and verify the signatures of signers residing in the respective county. The petition shall be transmitted to the auditor of the county in which all or the major geographic portion of the district is located, who shall certify to the sufficiency or insufficiency of the signatures. If the area proposed to be withdrawn is located in more than one county, the auditor of the county in which the largest geographic portion of the area proposed to be withdrawn is located shall be the lead auditor and shall immediately transfer a copy of the petitions to the auditor of each other county in which the area proposed to be withdrawn is located. Within ten days after the lead auditor received the petition, the auditors of these other counties shall certify to the lead auditor: (1) The number of voters of that county residing in the area proposed to be withdrawn who voted at the last municipal general election; and (2) the number of valid signatures on the petition of voters of that county residing in the area proposed to be withdrawn. The lead auditor shall certify the sufficiency of the petition after receiving this information. If such petition be found by such county auditor to contain sufficient signatures, the petition, together with a certificate of sufficiency attached thereto, shall be transmitted to the board of commissioners of the district.

\[ [1996 c 230 § 1003](https://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/1995-96/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/Senate/6091-S.SL.pdf?cite=1996%20c%20230%20§%201003); [1982 1st ex.s. c 17 § 23](https://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1982ex1c17.pdf?cite=1982%201st%20ex.s.%20c%2017%20§%2023); [1941 c 55 § 2](https://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1941c55.pdf?cite=1941%20c%2055%20§%202); Rem. Supp. 1941 § 11604-2; \]

## 57.28.030 - Petition of landowners.
In the event there are no qualified voters residing within the territory proposed to be withdrawn, the petition for withdrawal may be signed by such persons as appear of record to own at least a majority of the acreage within such territory, in which event the petition shall also state the total number of acres and the names of all record owners of the land within such territory. The petition so signed shall be filed with the board of commissioners of the district, and after such filing no person having signed the same shall be allowed to withdraw that person's name.

\[ [1996 c 230 § 1004](https://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/1995-96/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/Senate/6091-S.SL.pdf?cite=1996%20c%20230%20§%201004); [1941 c 55 § 3](https://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1941c55.pdf?cite=1941%20c%2055%20§%203); Rem. Supp. 1941 § 11604-3; \]

## 57.28.035 - Alternative procedure—Resolution.
As an alternative procedure to those set forth in RCW 57.28.010 through 57.28.030, the withdrawal of territory within a district may be commenced by a resolution of the board of commissioners that sets forth boundaries of the territory to be withdrawn and sets a date for the public hearing required under RCW 57.28.050. Upon the final hearing, the board of commissioners shall make such changes in the proposed boundaries as they deem proper, except that no changes in the boundary lines may be made by the board of commissioners to include lands not within the boundaries of the territory as described in such resolution.

Whenever the board of commissioners proposes to commence the withdrawal of any portion of its territory located within a city or town using the alternative procedures herein authorized, it shall first notify such city or town of their [its] intent to withdraw the territory. If the legislative authority of the city or town takes no action within sixty days of receipt of notification, the district may proceed with the resolution method.

If the city or town legislative authority disapproves of use of the alternative procedures, the board of commissioners may proceed using the process established under RCW 57.28.010 through 57.28.030.

A withdrawal procedure commenced under this section shall be subject to the procedures and requirements set forth in RCW 57.28.040 through 57.28.110.

\[ [1996 c 230 § 1005](https://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/1995-96/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/Senate/6091-S.SL.pdf?cite=1996%20c%20230%20§%201005); [1985 c 153 § 1](https://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1985c153.pdf?cite=1985%20c%20153%20§%201); \]

## 57.28.040 - Notice of hearing—Bond for costs.
Upon receipt by the board of commissioners of a petition and certificate of sufficiency of the auditor, or if the petition is signed by landowners and the board of commissioners is satisfied as to the sufficiency of the signatures thereon, it shall at a regular or special meeting fix a date for hearing on the petition and give notice that the petition has been filed, stating the time and place of the meeting of the board of commissioners at which the petition will be heard and setting forth the boundaries of the territory proposed to be withdrawn. The notice shall be published at least once a week for two successive weeks in a newspaper of general circulation therein, and if no such newspaper is printed in the county, then in some newspaper of general circulation in the county and district. Any additional notice of the hearing may be given as the board of commissioners may by resolution direct.

Prior to fixing the time for a hearing on any such petition, the board of commissioners in its discretion may require the petitioners to furnish a satisfactory bond conditioned that the petitioners shall pay all costs incurred by the district in connection with the petition, including the cost of an election if one is held pursuant thereto, and should the petitioners fail or refuse to post such a bond, if one is required by the district board of commissioners, then there shall be no duty on the part of the board of commissioners to act upon the petition.

\[ [1996 c 230 § 1006](https://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/1995-96/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/Senate/6091-S.SL.pdf?cite=1996%20c%20230%20§%201006); [1985 c 469 § 59](https://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1985c469.pdf?cite=1985%20c%20469%20§%2059); [1951 c 112 § 3](https://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1951c112.pdf?cite=1951%20c%20112%20§%203); [1941 c 55 § 4](https://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1941c55.pdf?cite=1941%20c%2055%20§%204); Rem. Supp. 1941 § 11604-4; \]

## 57.28.050 - Hearing—Findings.
The petition for withdrawal shall be heard at the time and place specified in such notice or the hearing may be adjourned from time to time, not exceeding one month in all, and any person may appear at such hearing and make objections to the withdrawal of such territory or to the proposed boundary lines thereof. Upon final hearing on the petition for withdrawal, the board of commissioners of the district shall make such changes in the proposed boundary lines as it deems to be proper, except that no changes in the boundary lines shall be made by the board of commissioners to include lands not within the boundaries of the territory as described in such petition. In establishing and defining such boundaries the board of commissioners shall exclude any property which is then being furnished with water, sewer, or drainage service by the district or which is included in any distribution or collection system the construction of which is included within any duly established local improvement district or utility local improvement district, and the territory as finally established and defined must be substantial in area and consist of adjoining or contiguous properties. The board of commissioners shall thereupon make and by resolution adopt findings of fact as to the following questions:

1. Would the withdrawal of such territory be of benefit to such territory?

2. Would such withdrawal be conducive to the general welfare of the balance of the district?

Such findings shall be entered in the records of the district, together with any recommendations the board of commissioners may by resolution adopt.

\[ [1999 c 153 § 21](https://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/1999-00/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/House/1264.SL.pdf?cite=1999%20c%20153%20§%2021); [1996 c 230 § 1007](https://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/1995-96/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/Senate/6091-S.SL.pdf?cite=1996%20c%20230%20§%201007); [1986 c 109 § 1](https://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1986c109.pdf?cite=1986%20c%20109%20§%201); [1941 c 55 § 5](https://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1941c55.pdf?cite=1941%20c%2055%20§%205); Rem. Supp. 1941 § 11604-5; \]

## 57.28.060 - Transmission to county legislative authorities.
Within ten days after the final hearing the board of commissioners of the district shall transmit to the county legislative authority of each county in which the district is located the petition for withdrawal, together with a copy of the findings and recommendations of the board of commissioners of the district certified by the secretary of the district to be a true and correct copy of such findings and recommendations as the same appear on the records of the district.

\[ [1996 c 230 § 1008](https://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/1995-96/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/Senate/6091-S.SL.pdf?cite=1996%20c%20230%20§%201008); [1982 1st ex.s. c 17 § 24](https://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1982ex1c17.pdf?cite=1982%201st%20ex.s.%20c%2017%20§%2024); [1941 c 55 § 6](https://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1941c55.pdf?cite=1941%20c%2055%20§%206); Rem. Supp. 1941 § 11604-6; \]

## 57.28.070 - Notice of hearing before county legislative authority.
Upon receipt of the petition and certified copy of the findings and recommendations adopted by the district commissioners, the county legislative authority of each county in which the district is located at a regular or special meeting shall fix a time and place for hearing thereon and shall cause to be published at least once a week for two or more weeks in successive issues of a newspaper of general circulation in the district, a notice that such petition has been presented to the county legislative authority stating the time and place of the hearing thereon, setting forth the boundaries of the territory proposed to be withdrawn as such boundaries are established and defined in the findings or recommendations of the board of commissioners of the district.

\[ [1996 c 230 § 1009](https://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/1995-96/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/Senate/6091-S.SL.pdf?cite=1996%20c%20230%20§%201009); [1982 1st ex.s. c 17 § 25](https://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1982ex1c17.pdf?cite=1982%201st%20ex.s.%20c%2017%20§%2025); [1941 c 55 § 7](https://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1941c55.pdf?cite=1941%20c%2055%20§%207); Rem. Supp. 1941 § 11604-7; \]

## 57.28.080 - Hearing—Findings.
The petition shall be heard at the time and place specified in the notice, or the hearing may be adjourned from time to time, not exceeding one month in all, and any person may appear at the hearing and make objections to the withdrawal of the territory. Upon final hearing on the petition the county legislative authority shall thereupon make, enter, and by resolution adopt its findings of fact on the questions set forth in RCW 57.28.050. If the findings of fact answer the questions affirmatively, and if they are the same as the findings made by the district commissioners, then the county legislative authority shall by resolution declare that the territory be withdrawn from that district, and thereupon the territory shall be withdrawn and excluded from that district the same as if it had never been included therein except for the lien of taxes as hereinafter set forth. However, the boundaries of the territory withdrawn shall be the boundaries established and defined by the district board of commissioners and shall not be altered or changed by the county legislative authority unless the unanimous consent of the district commissioners be given in writing to any such alteration or change.

\[ [1996 c 230 § 1010](https://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/1995-96/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/Senate/6091-S.SL.pdf?cite=1996%20c%20230%20§%201010); [1941 c 55 § 8](https://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1941c55.pdf?cite=1941%20c%2055%20§%208); Rem. Supp. 1941 § 11604-8; \]

## 57.28.090 - Election on withdrawal.
If the findings of any county legislative authority answer any of the questions of fact set forth in RCW 57.28.050 in the negative, or if any of the findings of the county legislative authority are not the same as the findings of the district board of commissioners upon the same question, then in either of such events, the petition for withdrawal shall be deemed denied. Thereupon, and in such event, the county legislative authority of each county in which the district is located shall by resolution cause a special election to be held not less than thirty days or more than sixty days from the date of the final hearing of any county legislative authority upon the petition for withdrawal, at which election the proposition expressed on the ballots shall be substantially as follows:

"Shall the territory established and defined by the district board of commissioners at its meeting held on the . . . . . . (insert date of final hearing of district board of commissioners upon the petition for withdrawal) be withdrawn from district . . . . . . (naming it).

YES □ NO □"

YES □

 

NO □"

\[ [1996 c 230 § 1011](https://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/1995-96/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/Senate/6091-S.SL.pdf?cite=1996%20c%20230%20§%201011); [1982 1st ex.s. c 17 § 26](https://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1982ex1c17.pdf?cite=1982%201st%20ex.s.%20c%2017%20§%2026); [1941 c 55 § 9](https://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1941c55.pdf?cite=1941%20c%2055%20§%209); Rem. Supp. 1941 § 11604-9; \]

## 57.28.100 - Notice of election—Election—Canvass.
Notice of the election shall be posted and published in the same manner provided by law for the posting and publication of notice of elections to annex territory to districts. The territory described in the notice shall be that established and defined by the district board of commissioners. All qualified voters residing within the district shall have the right to vote at the election. If a majority of the votes cast favor the withdrawal from the district of such territory, then within ten days after the official canvass of the election the county legislative authority of each county in which the district is located shall by resolution establish that the territory has been withdrawn, and the territory shall thereupon be withdrawn and excluded from the district the same as if it had never been included therein except for the lien of any taxes as hereinafter set forth.

\[ [1996 c 230 § 1012](https://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/1995-96/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/Senate/6091-S.SL.pdf?cite=1996%20c%20230%20§%201012); [1982 1st ex.s. c 17 § 27](https://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1982ex1c17.pdf?cite=1982%201st%20ex.s.%20c%2017%20§%2027); [1941 c 55 § 10](https://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1941c55.pdf?cite=1941%20c%2055%20§%2010); Rem. Supp. 1941 § 11604-10; \]

## 57.28.110 - Taxes and assessments unaffected.
Taxes or assessments levied or assessed against property located in territory withdrawn from a district shall remain a lien and be collected as by law provided when the taxes or assessments are levied or assessed prior to the withdrawal or when the levies or assessments are duly made to provide revenue for the payment of general obligations or general obligation bonds of the district duly incurred or issued prior to the withdrawal.

\[ [1996 c 230 § 1013](https://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/1995-96/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/Senate/6091-S.SL.pdf?cite=1996%20c%20230%20§%201013); [1941 c 55 § 11](https://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1941c55.pdf?cite=1941%20c%2055%20§%2011); Rem. Supp. 1941 § 11604-11; \]

