# 57.46 - Voluntary contributions to assist low-income customers.
* [57.46.010 - Voluntary contributions to assist low-income residential customers—Administration.](#5746010---voluntary-contributions-to-assist-low-income-residential-customersadministration)
* [57.46.020 - Disbursement of contributions—Quarterly report.](#5746020---disbursement-of-contributionsquarterly-report)
* [57.46.030 - Contributions not considered commingling of funds.](#5746030---contributions-not-considered-commingling-of-funds)
## 57.46.010 - Voluntary contributions to assist low-income residential customers—Administration.
A district may include along with, or as part of its regular customer billings, a request for voluntary contributions to assist qualified low-income residential customers of the district in paying their district bills. All funds received by the district in response to such requests shall be transmitted to the grantee of the *department of community, trade, and economic development which administers federally funded energy assistance programs for the state in the district's service area or to a charitable organization within the district's service area. All such funds shall be used solely to supplement assistance to low-income residential customers of the district in paying their district bills. The grantee or charitable organization shall be responsible to determine which of the district's customers are qualified for low-income assistance and the amount of assistance to be provided to those who are qualified.

\[ [1996 c 230 § 1401](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/1995-96/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/Senate/6091-S.SL.pdf?cite=1996%20c%20230%20§%201401); [1995 c 399 § 149](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/1995-96/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/House/1014.SL.pdf?cite=1995%20c%20399%20§%20149); [1993 c 45 § 5](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/1993-94/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/Senate/5110-S.SL.pdf?cite=1993%20c%2045%20§%205); \]

## 57.46.020 - Disbursement of contributions—Quarterly report.
All assistance provided under this chapter shall be disbursed by the grantee or charitable organization. Where possible the district shall be paid on behalf of the customer by the grantee or the charitable organization. When direct vendor payment is not feasible, a check shall be issued jointly payable to the customer and the district. The availability of funds for assistance to a district's low-income customers as a result of voluntary contributions shall not reduce the amount of assistance for which the district's customers are eligible under the federally funded energy assistance programs administered by the grantee of the *department of community, trade, and economic development within the district's service area. The grantee or charitable organization shall provide the district with a quarterly report on January 15th, April 15th, July 15th, and October 15th which includes information concerning the total amount of funds received from the district, the names of all recipients of assistance from these funds, the amount received by each recipient, and the amount of funds received from the district currently on hand and available for future low-income assistance.

\[ [1996 c 230 § 1402](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/1995-96/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/Senate/6091-S.SL.pdf?cite=1996%20c%20230%20§%201402); [1995 c 399 § 150](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/1995-96/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/House/1014.SL.pdf?cite=1995%20c%20399%20§%20150); [1993 c 45 § 6](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/1993-94/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/Senate/5110-S.SL.pdf?cite=1993%20c%2045%20§%206); \]

## 57.46.030 - Contributions not considered commingling of funds.
Contributions received under a program implemented by a district in compliance with this chapter shall not be considered a commingling of funds.

\[ [1996 c 230 § 1403](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/1995-96/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/Senate/6091-S.SL.pdf?cite=1996%20c%20230%20§%201403); [1993 c 45 § 7](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/1993-94/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/Senate/5110-S.SL.pdf?cite=1993%20c%2045%20§%207); \]

