# Substitute Senate Bill 5068 - Session Law Chapter 090 Year 2021 as Recommended by Ways & Means

[Source](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/2021-22/Xml/Bills/Session%20Laws/Senate/5068-S.SL.xml)
## Section 1
(1) In Washington and across the country, maternal mortality rates continue to be unacceptably high. The maternal mortality rate in the United States is higher than in most developed countries. Approximately 700 people die each year in the United States due to pregnancy-related conditions. The majority of these deaths are preventable.
(2) National and state maternal mortality data reveals significant racial and ethnic disparities. Nationally, black women are two to three times more likely to die from a pregnancy-related cause than white women. In this state, data from the maternal mortality review panel reveals that American Indian and Alaska Native women are six to seven times as likely to die from a pregnancy-related cause than white women. Significant disparities in maternal mortality rates also exist for Hispanic, Asian, and multiracial women in Washington.
(3) Over 50 percent of pregnancy-related deaths in Washington state are women enrolled in medicaid. In 2019, medicaid covered almost 37,000 births which is nearly half of the total of nonmilitary births in Washington state.
(4) The centers for disease control and prevention find pregnancy-related deaths occur up to one year postpartum, and data shows that health needs continue during that entire year. In Washington, nearly one-third of all pregnancy-related deaths and the majority of suicides and accidental overdoses occurred between 43 and 365 days postpartum.
(5) The maternal mortality review panel has identified access to health care services and gaps in continuity of care, especially during the postpartum period, as factors that contribute to preventable pregnancy-related deaths. In their October 2019 report to the legislature, the panel recommended ensuring funding and access to postpartum care and support through the first year after pregnancy. The panel also recommended addressing social determinants of health, structural racism, provider biases, and other social inequities to reduce maternal mortality in priority populations.
(6) Approximately 50,000 people also experience serious complications from childbirth each year, resulting in increased medical costs, longer hospitalization stays, and long-term health effects.
(7) Postpartum medicaid coverage currently ends 60 days after pregnancy, creating an unsafe gap in coverage. Continuity of care is critical during this vulnerable time, and uninterrupted health care coverage provides birthing parents with access to stable and consistent care. Extending health care coverage through the first year postpartum is one of the best tools for increasing access to care and improving maternal and infant health. A health impact review published by the state board of health found very strong evidence that this policy would decrease inequities by race and ethnicity, immigration status, socioeconomic status, and geography.
(8) During the public health emergency, a federal maintenance of effort requirement has extended medicaid coverage beyond 60 days postpartum. This extension is critical, with pregnancy-related deaths increasing due to COVID-19. Pregnant women are more likely to be admitted to the intensive care unit and receive invasive ventilation and are at increased risk of death compared to nonpregnant women. The pandemic has also exacerbated the behavioral health challenges normally faced in the pregnancy and postpartum period. It has also highlighted and contributed to increased housing crises. Even outside of the pandemic, research shows that pregnancy can increase a woman's risk of becoming homeless, and pregnant women face significantly greater health risks while unstably housed. The legislature is committed to continuing coverage for this population beyond the maintenance of effort requirement.
(9) Pending federal legislation, the helping moms act, would provide federal matching funds to states that provide one year of postpartum coverage under medicaid and the children's health insurance program.
(10) The legislature therefore intends to extend health care coverage from 60 days to 12 months postpartum.

## Section 3
Unless federal matching funds become available by the effective date of this section, the health care authority must submit a waiver request to the federal centers for medicare and medicaid services to allow for the state to receive federal match for the coverage of postpartum persons identified in section 2 of this act. The authority shall provide coverage to all eligible postpartum persons identified under section 2 of this act regardless of federal approval of the waiver request. The authority must report to the legislature on the status of the waiver request by December 1, 2021, and inform the legislature of any statutory changes necessary to allow the state to receive federal match for the coverage of postpartum persons identified in section 2 of this act.
