# 43.23 - Department of agriculture.
* [43.23.001 - Definitions.](#4323001---definitions)
* [43.23.002 - Director—Appointment—Powers and duties—Salary.](#4323002---directorappointmentpowers-and-dutiessalary)
* [43.23.005 - Deputy director—Appointment—Powers and duties.](#4323005---deputy-directorappointmentpowers-and-duties)
* [43.23.010 - Divisions of department—Assistant directors—State veterinarian—Salaries—Assignment of duties.](#4323010---divisions-of-departmentassistant-directorsstate-veterinariansalariesassignment-of-duties)
* [43.23.015 - Divisions of department—Reassignment of division functions.](#4323015---divisions-of-departmentreassignment-of-division-functions)
* [43.23.025 - Rule-making authority.](#4323025---rule-making-authority)
* [43.23.030 - Powers and duties.](#4323030---powers-and-duties)
* [43.23.033 - Funding staff support for commodity boards and commissions—Rules.](#4323033---funding-staff-support-for-commodity-boards-and-commissionsrules)
* [43.23.035 - Powers and duties—State agricultural market development programs and activities.](#4323035---powers-and-dutiesstate-agricultural-market-development-programs-and-activities)
* [43.23.037 - Publishing and dissemination costs—Deposit of proceeds.](#4323037---publishing-and-dissemination-costsdeposit-of-proceeds)
* [43.23.042 - Consultation with commodity commissions.](#4323042---consultation-with-commodity-commissions)
* [43.23.050 - Powers and duties.](#4323050---powers-and-duties)
* [43.23.070 - Powers and duties of state veterinarian.](#4323070---powers-and-duties-of-state-veterinarian)
* [43.23.090 - Powers and duties.](#4323090---powers-and-duties)
* [43.23.110 - Powers and duties.](#4323110---powers-and-duties)
* [43.23.115 - Gifts, grants, bequests, or contributions.](#4323115---gifts-grants-bequests-or-contributions)
* [43.23.120 - Bulletins and reports.](#4323120---bulletins-and-reports)
* [43.23.130 - Annual report.](#4323130---annual-report)
* [43.23.160 - Powers and duties.](#4323160---powers-and-duties)
* [43.23.170 - Enforcement in accordance with RCW  43.05.100 and  43.05.110.](#4323170---enforcement-in-accordance-with-rcw--4305100-and--4305110)
* [43.23.200 - Official chemists of department—Designated—Duties.](#4323200---official-chemists-of-departmentdesignatedduties)
* [43.23.205 - Additional chemists—Appointment—Duties—Compensation.](#4323205---additional-chemistsappointmentdutiescompensation)
* [43.23.220 - Disposition of impounded livestock on Hanford reservation—Agreements to act as federal government's agent.](#4323220---disposition-of-impounded-livestock-on-hanford-reservationagreements-to-act-as-federal-governments-agent)
* [43.23.230 - Agricultural local fund—Animal disease traceability account.](#4323230---agricultural-local-fundanimal-disease-traceability-account)
* [43.23.250 - Collection of unpaid penalties, assessments, and debts—Use of collection agencies.](#4323250---collection-of-unpaid-penalties-assessments-and-debtsuse-of-collection-agencies)
* [43.23.255 - Assessments levied by director—Personal debt—Costs of collecting—Civil actions authorized—Attorneys' fees.](#4323255---assessments-levied-by-directorpersonal-debtcosts-of-collectingcivil-actions-authorizedattorneys-fees)
* [43.23.260 - Interest on unpaid balances.](#4323260---interest-on-unpaid-balances)
* [43.23.265 - Dishonored check or negotiable instrument.](#4323265---dishonored-check-or-negotiable-instrument)
* [43.23.270 - Export market development project records—Confidentiality.](#4323270---export-market-development-project-recordsconfidentiality)
* [43.23.275 - Market development and promotion matching fund program.](#4323275---market-development-and-promotion-matching-fund-program)
* [43.23.280 - Trade barrier matching fund program.](#4323280---trade-barrier-matching-fund-program)
* [43.23.290 - Food assistance programs.](#4323290---food-assistance-programs)
* [43.23.300 - Program to promote and protect pollinator habitat and pollinator species.](#4323300---program-to-promote-and-protect-pollinator-habitat-and-pollinator-species)
* [43.23.310 - Environmental justice obligations of the department of agriculture.](#4323310---environmental-justice-obligations-of-the-department-of-agriculture)
* [43.23.320 - Pollinator health task force. (Expires January 1, 2024.)](#4323320---pollinator-health-task-force-expires-january-1-2024)
## 43.23.001 - Definitions.
For purposes of this chapter:

1. "Department" means department of agriculture;

2. "Person" means any individual, partnership, association, corporation, or organized group of persons whether or not incorporated.

\[ [1995 c 374 § 61](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/1995-96/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/Senate/5315-S.SL.pdf?cite=1995%20c%20374%20§%2061); \]

## 43.23.002 - Director—Appointment—Powers and duties—Salary.
The executive and administrative head of the department of agriculture shall be the director. The director shall be appointed by the governor with the consent of the senate and shall have complete charge of and supervisory power over the department. The director shall be paid a salary fixed by the governor in accordance with RCW 43.03.040.

\[ [1983 c 248 § 1](http://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1983c248.pdf?cite=1983%20c%20248%20§%201); \]

## 43.23.005 - Deputy director—Appointment—Powers and duties.
The director of agriculture may appoint a deputy director who shall assist the director in the administration of the affairs of the department and who shall have charge and general supervision of the department in the absence or disability of the director, and who, in case a vacancy occurs in the office of director, shall continue in charge of the department until a director is appointed and qualified, or the governor appoints an acting director.

\[ [1983 c 248 § 2](http://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1983c248.pdf?cite=1983%20c%20248%20§%202); [1967 c 240 § 14](http://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1967c240.pdf?cite=1967%20c%20240%20§%2014); \]

## 43.23.010 - Divisions of department—Assistant directors—State veterinarian—Salaries—Assignment of duties.
In order to obtain maximum efficiency and effectiveness within the department of agriculture, the director may create such administrative divisions within the department as he or she deems necessary. The director shall appoint a deputy director as well as such assistant directors as shall be needed to administer the several divisions within the department. The director shall appoint no more than eight assistant directors. The officers appointed under this section are exempt from the provisions of the state civil service law as provided in RCW 41.06.070(1)(g), and shall be paid salaries to be fixed by the governor in accordance with the procedure established by law for the fixing of salaries for officers exempt from the operation of the state civil service law. The director shall also appoint and deputize a state veterinarian who shall be an experienced veterinarian properly licensed to practice veterinary medicine in this state.

The director of agriculture shall have charge and general supervision of the department and may assign supervisory and administrative duties other than those specified in RCW 43.23.070 to the division which in his or her judgment can most efficiently carry on those functions.

\[ [2002 c 354 § 244](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/2001-02/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/House/1268-S.SL.pdf?cite=2002%20c%20354%20§%20244); [1990 c 37 § 1](http://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1990c37.pdf?cite=1990%20c%2037%20§%201); [1983 c 248 § 3](http://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1983c248.pdf?cite=1983%20c%20248%20§%203); [1967 c 240 § 1](http://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1967c240.pdf?cite=1967%20c%20240%20§%201); [1965 c 8 § 43.23.010](http://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1965c8.pdf?cite=1965%20c%208%20§%2043.23.010); [1951 c 170 § 1](http://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1951c170.pdf?cite=1951%20c%20170%20§%201); [1921 c 7 § 83](http://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1921c7.pdf?cite=1921%20c%207%20§%2083); RRS § 10841; \]

## 43.23.015 - Divisions of department—Reassignment of division functions.
Except for the functions specified in RCW 43.23.070, the director may, at his or her discretion, reassign any of the functions delegated to the various divisions of the department under the provisions of this chapter or any other law to any other division of the department.

\[ [2009 c 549 § 5103](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/2009-10/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/Senate/5038.SL.pdf?cite=2009%20c%20549%20§%205103); [1983 c 248 § 4](http://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1983c248.pdf?cite=1983%20c%20248%20§%204); [1967 c 240 § 15](http://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1967c240.pdf?cite=1967%20c%20240%20§%2015); \]

## 43.23.025 - Rule-making authority.
For rules adopted after July 23, 1995, the director of agriculture may not rely solely on a section of law stating a statute's intent or purpose, on the enabling provisions of the statute establishing the agency, or on any combination of such provisions, for statutory authority to adopt any rule.

\[ [1995 c 403 § 104](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/1995-96/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/House/1010-S.SL.pdf?cite=1995%20c%20403%20§%20104); \]

## 43.23.030 - Powers and duties.
The director of agriculture shall exercise all the powers and perform all the duties relating to the development of markets, for agricultural products, state and federal cooperative marketing programs, land utilization for agricultural purposes, water resources, transportation, and farm labor as such matters relate to the production, distribution and sale of agricultural commodities including private sector cultured aquatic products as defined in RCW 15.85.020.

\[ [1985 c 457 § 15](http://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1985c457.pdf?cite=1985%20c%20457%20§%2015); [1983 c 248 § 5](http://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1983c248.pdf?cite=1983%20c%20248%20§%205); [1967 c 240 § 3](http://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1967c240.pdf?cite=1967%20c%20240%20§%203); [1965 c 8 § 43.23.030](http://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1965c8.pdf?cite=1965%20c%208%20§%2043.23.030); [1921 c 7 § 90](http://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1921c7.pdf?cite=1921%20c%207%20§%2090); RRS § 10848.   1937 c 90 § 10; RRS § 10847-1; \]

## 43.23.033 - Funding staff support for commodity boards and commissions—Rules.
1. The director may provide by rule for a method to fund staff support for all commodity boards and commissions if a position is not directly funded by the legislature.

2. Staff support funded under this section, RCW 15.65.047(1)(c), 15.66.055(3), 15.24.215, 15.26.265, 15.28.320, 15.44.190, 15.88.180, 15.89.150, and 16.67.190, and chapter 15.115 RCW shall be limited to one-half full-time equivalent employee for all commodity boards and commissions.

\[ [2009 c 33 § 38](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/2009-10/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/House/1254-S.SL.pdf?cite=2009%20c%2033%20§%2038); [2006 c 330 § 27](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/2005-06/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/Senate/6661.SL.pdf?cite=2006%20c%20330%20§%2027); [2002 c 313 § 78](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/2001-02/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/House/2688-S.SL.pdf?cite=2002%20c%20313%20§%2078); \]

## 43.23.035 - Powers and duties—State agricultural market development programs and activities.
The department of agriculture is hereby designated as the agency of state government for the administration and implementation of state agricultural market development programs and activities, both domestic and foreign, and shall, in addition to the powers and duties otherwise imposed by law, have the following powers and duties:

1. To study the potential marketability of various agricultural commodities of this state in foreign and domestic trade;

2. To collect, prepare, and analyze foreign and domestic market data;

3. To establish a program to promote and assist in the marketing of Washington-bred horses: PROVIDED, That the department shall present a proposal to the legislature no later than December 1, 1986, that provides for the elimination of all state funding for the program after June 30, 1989;

4. To encourage and promote the sale of Washington's agricultural commodities and products at the site of their production through the development and dissemination of referral maps and other means;

5. To encourage and promote those agricultural industries, such as the wine industry, which attract visitors to rural areas in which other agricultural commodities and products are produced and are, or could be, made available for sale;

6. To encourage and promote the establishment and use of public markets in this state for the sale of Washington's agricultural products;

7. To maintain close contact with foreign firms and governmental agencies and to act as an effective intermediary between foreign nations and Washington traders;

8. To publish and disseminate to interested citizens and others information which will aid in carrying out the purposes of chapters 43.23, 15.64, 15.65, and 15.66 RCW;

9. To encourage and promote the movement of foreign and domestic agricultural goods through the ports of Washington;

10. To conduct an active program by sending representatives to, or engaging representatives in, foreign countries to promote the state's agricultural commodities and products;

11. To assist and to make Washington agricultural concerns more aware of the potentials of foreign trade and to encourage production of those commodities that will have high export potential and appeal;

12. To coordinate the trade promotional activities of appropriate federal, state, and local public agencies, as well as civic organizations; and

13. To develop a coordinated marketing program with the *department of community, trade, and economic development, utilizing existing trade offices and participating in mutual trade missions and activities.

As used in this section, "agricultural commodities" includes products of both terrestrial and aquatic farming.

\[ [1995 c 399 § 70](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/1995-96/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/House/1014.SL.pdf?cite=1995%20c%20399%20§%2070); [1986 c 202 § 1](http://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1986c202.pdf?cite=1986%20c%20202%20§%201); [1985 c 159 § 3](http://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1985c159.pdf?cite=1985%20c%20159%20§%203); \]

## 43.23.037 - Publishing and dissemination costs—Deposit of proceeds.
The director may collect moneys to recover the reasonable costs of publishing and disseminating informational materials by the department. Materials may be disseminated in printed or electronic format. All moneys collected shall be deposited in the agricultural local fund or other appropriate fund administered by the director.

\[ [1997 c 303 § 5](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/1997-98/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/Senate/5514.SL.pdf?cite=1997%20c%20303%20§%205); \]

## 43.23.042 - Consultation with commodity commissions.
The director may consult with each commodity commission established under state law in order to establish or maintain an integrated comprehensive regulatory scheme for each commodity and the agricultural industry in this state as a whole.

\[ [2002 c 313 § 112](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/2001-02/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/House/2688-S.SL.pdf?cite=2002%20c%20313%20§%20112); \]

## 43.23.050 - Powers and duties.
The director of agriculture shall:

1. Exercise all the powers and perform all the duties prescribed by law relating to horticulture, and horticultural plants and products;

2. Enforce and supervise the administration of all laws relating to horticulture, horticultural products, and horticultural interests.

\[ [1983 c 248 § 6](http://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1983c248.pdf?cite=1983%20c%20248%20§%206); [1967 c 240 § 5](http://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1967c240.pdf?cite=1967%20c%20240%20§%205); [1965 c 8 § 43.23.050](http://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1965c8.pdf?cite=1965%20c%208%20§%2043.23.050); [1921 c 7 § 91](http://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1921c7.pdf?cite=1921%20c%207%20§%2091); RRS § 10849; \]

## 43.23.070 - Powers and duties of state veterinarian.
The state veterinarian shall exercise all the powers and perform all duties prescribed by law relating to diseases among animals and the quarantine and destruction of diseased animals.

The state veterinarian shall enforce and supervise the administration of all laws relating to meat inspection, the prevention, detection, control and eradication of diseases of animals, and all other matters relative to the diseases of livestock and their effect upon the public health.

\[ [1998 c 8 § 20](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/1997-98/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/Senate/6123.SL.pdf?cite=1998%20c%208%20§%2020); [1983 c 248 § 7](http://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1983c248.pdf?cite=1983%20c%20248%20§%207); [1967 c 240 § 7](http://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1967c240.pdf?cite=1967%20c%20240%20§%207); [1965 c 8 § 43.23.070](http://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1965c8.pdf?cite=1965%20c%208%20§%2043.23.070); [1943 c 56 § 1](http://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1943c56.pdf?cite=1943%20c%2056%20§%201); [1921 c 7 § 92](http://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1921c7.pdf?cite=1921%20c%207%20§%2092); Rem. Supp. 1943 § 10850; \]

## 43.23.090 - Powers and duties.
The director of agriculture shall exercise all powers and perform all duties prescribed by law with respect to the inspection of foods, food products, drinks, milk and milk products, and dairies and dairy products and the components thereof.

He or she shall enforce and supervise the administration of all laws relating to foods, food products, drinks, milk and milk products, dairies and dairy products, and their inspection, manufacture, and sale.

\[ [2009 c 549 § 5104](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/2009-10/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/Senate/5038.SL.pdf?cite=2009%20c%20549%20§%205104); [1983 c 248 § 8](http://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1983c248.pdf?cite=1983%20c%20248%20§%208); [1967 c 240 § 9](http://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1967c240.pdf?cite=1967%20c%20240%20§%209); [1965 c 8 § 43.23.090](http://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1965c8.pdf?cite=1965%20c%208%20§%2043.23.090); [1921 c 7 § 93](http://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1921c7.pdf?cite=1921%20c%207%20§%2093); RRS § 10851; \]

## 43.23.110 - Powers and duties.
The director of agriculture shall exercise all powers and perform all duties prescribed by law with respect to grains, grain and hay products, grain and terminal warehouses, commercial feeds, commercial fertilizers, and chemical pesticides.

He or she shall enforce and supervise the administration of all laws relating to grains, grain and hay products, grain and terminal warehouses, commercial feeds, commercial fertilizers, and chemical pesticides.

\[ [2009 c 549 § 5105](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/2009-10/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/Senate/5038.SL.pdf?cite=2009%20c%20549%20§%205105); [1983 c 248 § 9](http://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1983c248.pdf?cite=1983%20c%20248%20§%209); [1967 c 240 § 11](http://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1967c240.pdf?cite=1967%20c%20240%20§%2011); [1965 c 8 § 43.23.110](http://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1965c8.pdf?cite=1965%20c%208%20§%2043.23.110); [1921 c 7 § 94](http://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1921c7.pdf?cite=1921%20c%207%20§%2094); RRS § 10852; \]

## 43.23.115 - Gifts, grants, bequests, or contributions.
The director of the department may accept, expend, and retain gifts, grants, bequests, or contributions from public or private sources to carry out the purposes and programs of the department.

\[ [2011 c 245 § 1](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/2011-12/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/Senate/5072-S.SL.pdf?cite=2011%20c%20245%20§%201); \]

## 43.23.120 - Bulletins and reports.
The director of agriculture may publish and distribute bulletins and reports embodying information upon the subjects of agriculture, horticulture, livestock, dairying, foods and drugs, and other matters pertaining to his or her department.

\[ [2009 c 549 § 5106](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/2009-10/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/Senate/5038.SL.pdf?cite=2009%20c%20549%20§%205106); [1977 c 75 § 50](http://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1977c75.pdf?cite=1977%20c%2075%20§%2050); [1965 c 8 § 43.23.120](http://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1965c8.pdf?cite=1965%20c%208%20§%2043.23.120); 1919 c 126 § 1, part; 1913 c 60 § 6, part; RRS § 2724, part.  1921 c 7 § 89, part; RRS § 10847, part; \]

## 43.23.130 - Annual report.
The director of agriculture shall make an annual report to the governor containing an account of all matters pertaining to his or her department and its administration.

\[ [2009 c 549 § 5107](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/2009-10/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/Senate/5038.SL.pdf?cite=2009%20c%20549%20§%205107); [1977 c 75 § 51](http://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1977c75.pdf?cite=1977%20c%2075%20§%2051); [1965 c 8 § 43.23.130](http://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1965c8.pdf?cite=1965%20c%208%20§%2043.23.130); 1919 c 126 § 1, part; 1913 c 60 § 6, part; RRS § 2724, part.  1921 c 7 § 89, part; RRS § 10847, part; \]

## 43.23.160 - Powers and duties.
The director of agriculture shall exercise all the powers and perform all the duties prescribed by law relating to commission merchants, livestock identification, livestock brand registration and inspection. All officers appointed to enforce these laws who have successfully completed a course of training prescribed by the Washington state criminal justice training commission shall have the authority generally vested in a peace officer solely for the purpose of enforcing these laws.

He or she shall enforce and supervise the administration of all laws relating to commission merchants, livestock identification and shall have the power to enforce all laws relating to any division under the supervision of the director of agriculture.

\[ [2009 c 549 § 5108](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/2009-10/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/Senate/5038.SL.pdf?cite=2009%20c%20549%20§%205108); [1983 c 248 § 10](http://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1983c248.pdf?cite=1983%20c%20248%20§%2010); [1967 c 240 § 13](http://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1967c240.pdf?cite=1967%20c%20240%20§%2013); [1965 c 8 § 43.23.160](http://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1965c8.pdf?cite=1965%20c%208%20§%2043.23.160); prior:  1951 c 170 § 3; \]

## 43.23.170 - Enforcement in accordance with RCW  43.05.100 and  43.05.110.
Enforcement action taken after July 23, 1995, by the director or the department of agriculture shall be in accordance with RCW 43.05.100 and 43.05.110.

\[ [1995 c 403 § 623](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/1995-96/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/House/1010-S.SL.pdf?cite=1995%20c%20403%20§%20623); \]

## 43.23.200 - Official chemists of department—Designated—Duties.
The chief chemist of the department of agriculture dairy and food laboratory and the chief chemist of the department of agriculture chemical and hop laboratory shall be the official chemists of the department of agriculture. Official chemists of the department shall provide laboratory services and analyze all substances that the director of agriculture may send to them and report to the director without unnecessary delay the results of any analysis so made. When called upon by the director, they or any of the additional chemists provided for pursuant to RCW 43.23.205 shall assist in any prosecution for the violation of any law enforced by the department.

\[ [1987 c 393 § 14](http://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1987c393.pdf?cite=1987%20c%20393%20§%2014); [1981 c 297 § 27](http://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1981c297.pdf?cite=1981%20c%20297%20§%2027); \]

## 43.23.205 - Additional chemists—Appointment—Duties—Compensation.
The director of agriculture may appoint one or more competent graduate chemists to serve as additional chemist of the department of agriculture, who may perform any of the duties required of and under the supervision of the official chemists, and whose compensation shall be fixed by the director.

\[ [1981 c 297 § 28](http://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1981c297.pdf?cite=1981%20c%20297%20§%2028); \]

## 43.23.220 - Disposition of impounded livestock on Hanford reservation—Agreements to act as federal government's agent.
The director of agriculture may enter written agreements with one or more agencies of the United States to act as the federal government's agent for determining the disposition of livestock impounded on the federal Hanford reservation. The director's authority under such an agreement may include, but is not limited to, selling or donating, on behalf of the federal government, unclaimed livestock to a qualified person, organization, or governmental agency that the director determines to be capable of humanely transporting and caring for the livestock. The director may sell or donate such livestock only if the livestock remains unclaimed after the completion of a reasonable attempt to ascertain ownership and, if ownership is not otherwise determined, by the publication of notice that the livestock has been impounded on the reservation.

\[ [1983 c 248 § 12](http://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1983c248.pdf?cite=1983%20c%20248%20§%2012); \]

## 43.23.230 - Agricultural local fund—Animal disease traceability account.
1. The agricultural local fund is hereby established in the custody of the state treasurer. The fund shall consist of such money as is directed by law for deposit in the fund, and such other money not subject to appropriation that the department authorizes to be deposited in the fund. Any money deposited in the fund, the use of which has been restricted by law, may only be expended in accordance with those restrictions. The department may make disbursements from the fund. The fund is not subject to legislative appropriation.

2. There is created within the agricultural local fund the animal disease traceability account which must be used to account for the costs associated with the implementation of chapter 16.36 RCW.

\[ [2011 c 204 § 7](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/2011-12/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/House/1538-S.SL.pdf?cite=2011%20c%20204%20§%207); [1988 c 254 § 1](http://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1988c254.pdf?cite=1988%20c%20254%20§%201); \]

## 43.23.250 - Collection of unpaid penalties, assessments, and debts—Use of collection agencies.
Except as otherwise specified by law, the director or his or her designee has the authority to retain collection agencies licensed under chapter 19.16 RCW for the purposes of collecting unpaid penalties, assessments, and other debts owed to the department.

The director or his or her designee may also collect as costs moneys paid to the collection agency as charges, or in the case of credit cards or financial instruments, such as checks returned for nonpayment, moneys paid to financial institutions.

\[ [1995 c 374 § 62](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/1995-96/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/Senate/5315-S.SL.pdf?cite=1995%20c%20374%20§%2062); \]

## 43.23.255 - Assessments levied by director—Personal debt—Costs of collecting—Civil actions authorized—Attorneys' fees.
Except as otherwise specified by law, any due and payable assessment levied under the authority of the director or his or her designee in such specified amount as may be determined by the department shall constitute a personal debt of every person so assessed or who otherwise owes the same, and the same shall be due and payable to the department when payment is called for by the department. In the event any person fails to pay the department the full amount of such assessment or such other sum on or before the date due, the department may, and is hereby authorized to, add to such unpaid assessment or other sum an amount not exceeding ten percent of the same to defray the cost of enforcing the collecting of the same. In the event of failure of such person or persons to pay any such due and payable assessment or other sum, the department may bring a civil action against such person or persons in a court of competent jurisdiction for the collections thereof, including all costs and reasonable attorneys' fees together with the above specified ten percent, and such action shall be tried and judgment rendered as in any other cause of action for debt due and payable.

\[ [1995 c 374 § 63](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/1995-96/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/Senate/5315-S.SL.pdf?cite=1995%20c%20374%20§%2063); \]

## 43.23.260 - Interest on unpaid balances.
Except as otherwise specified by law, the department is authorized to charge interest at the rate authorized under RCW 43.17.240 for all unpaid balances for moneys owed to the department.

\[ [1995 c 374 § 64](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/1995-96/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/Senate/5315-S.SL.pdf?cite=1995%20c%20374%20§%2064); \]

## 43.23.265 - Dishonored check or negotiable instrument.
Except as otherwise specified by law, in the event a check or negotiable instrument as defined by RCW 62A.3-104 is dishonored by nonacceptance or nonpayment, the department is entitled to collect a reasonable handling fee for each instrument. If the check or instrument is not paid within fifteen days and proper notice is sent, the department is authorized to recover the assessment, the handling fee, and any other charges allowed by RCW 62A.3-515.

\[ [1995 c 374 § 65](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/1995-96/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/Senate/5315-S.SL.pdf?cite=1995%20c%20374%20§%2065); \]

## 43.23.270 - Export market development project records—Confidentiality.
Except for release of statistical information not descriptive of any readily identifiable person or persons, all financial and commercial information and records supplied by persons to the department with respect to export market development projects shall be kept confidential unless confidentiality is waived by the party supplying the information. For purposes of this section, persons include any natural person, joint venture, firm, partnership or association, private or public corporation, or governmental entity.

\[ [1996 c 80 § 2](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/1995-96/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/House/2133.SL.pdf?cite=1996%20c%2080%20§%202); \]

## 43.23.275 - Market development and promotion matching fund program.
There is created a market development and promotion matching fund program within the Washington state department of agriculture. The purpose of the program is to allow the department of agriculture and the agricultural industry to combine funds in order to enhance access to markets that are growth sales areas for the industry's product. The goal of the program is to expose buyers to Washington's diverse agricultural products. The agriculture [agricultural] industry may bring in buying missions, perform trade promotions in various markets, hire overseas contractors, and perform other marketing functions that help it target the correct buyer and market for its product.

\[ [2001 c 324 § 2](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/2001-02/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/House/1891-S.SL.pdf?cite=2001%20c%20324%20§%202); \]

## 43.23.280 - Trade barrier matching fund program.
1. The legislature finds that trade barriers have become an increasingly important issue in the agricultural arena. Further, the world trade organization highlighted the need for "a fair and level playing field." The legislature finds that both large and small commodity groups need adequate resources to address trade barrier issues.

2. There is created within the department of agriculture a trade barrier matching fund program to assist agriculture [agricultural] industries in fighting trade barriers. The purpose of the program is to allow the department of agriculture and the agricultural industry to combine funds in order to address trade barriers issues impacting the agricultural industry.

\[ [2001 c 324 § 3](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/2001-02/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/House/1891-S.SL.pdf?cite=2001%20c%20324%20§%203); \]

## 43.23.290 - Food assistance programs.
The director of the department may exercise powers and duties with respect to the administration of food assistance programs in the department. It is the intent of the legislature in administering the food assistance programs transferred to the department by chapter 68, Laws of 2010, that programs continue to be provided through community-based organizations. It is the intent of the legislature that in accepting the administration of food assistance programs, the department's core programs administered by the department by July 1, 2010, not be impacted.

The director of the department may adopt rules necessary to implement the food assistance programs.

The director may enter into contracts and agreements to implement food assistance programs, including contracts and agreements with the United States department of agriculture, to implement federal food assistance programs.

\[ [2010 c 68 § 1](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/2009-10/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/Senate/6341-S.SL.pdf?cite=2010%20c%2068%20§%201); \]

## **43.23.300 - Program to promote and protect pollinator habitat and pollinator species.**
1. The department shall establish a program to promote and protect pollinator habitat and the health and sustainability of pollinator species. As funds are made available, the program must provide technical and financial assistance to state agencies, local governments, and private landowners to implement practices that promote habitat for managed pollinators, as well as beekeeper and grower best management practices. The program must be administered in coordination with the apiary program established in chapter 15.60 RCW, the honey bee commission authorized in chapter 15.62 RCW, and programs administered by the conservation commission and conservation districts.

2. **Subject to the availability of funds appropriated for this specific purpose, the department must:**

    a. **Evaluate and develop protocols that would increase communication between beekeepers, farmers and growers, and pesticide applicators including, but not limited to, education and outreach to beekeepers, farmers and growers, and pesticide applicators;**

    b. **Review, in consultation with Washington State University, education needs related to pollinator education and develop a plan that outlines the goals related to pollinator education and the necessary partners, personnel, and other resources;**

    c. **Create a catalog of current resources on best management practices and other educational resources related to pollinator health and make those resources available to the public on the department's website;**

    d. **Document, in consultation with Washington State University, the bee species within the state and map their distributions as practicable;**

    e. **Provide economic and environmental impacts of weed listing and categorization on pollinator health to county noxious weed control boards in consultation with the state noxious weed control board and annually submit a report to the noxious weed control board describing pollinator health issues;**

    f. **Provide materials, where practicable and in consultation with Washington State University, about certification programs that support pollinator health, biodiversity, and low-impact pesticide application to the public;**

    g. **Educate the public through plant nurseries about the necessity for blooming nectar plants to be available to pollinators throughout their respective active seasons;**

    h. **Survey registered beekeepers to determine whether the current apiary program should be expanded to include apiary inspections or registration of apiary yards;**

    i. **Continue and maintain partnership with federal agencies and neighboring states to promote and enhance the implementation of the national strategy to promote the health of honey bees and improve pollinator health;**

    j. **Increase the availability of pollinator-related resources on the department's website, as practicable, and other state agencies' websites as appropriate;**

    k. **Develop guidelines for allowing beekeeping on state managed lands so that impacts to wild pollinators from honey bees may be minimized; and**

    l. **In consultation with the department of revenue, review the open space taxation act and provide recommendations to the legislature, in compliance with RCW 43.01.036, on options to include pollinator habitat in the current open space property tax classification.**

## 43.23.310 - Environmental justice obligations of the department of agriculture.
The department must apply and comply with the substantive and procedural requirements of chapter 70A.02 RCW.

\[ [2021 c 314 § 6](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/2021-22/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/Senate/5141-S2.SL.pdf?cite=2021%20c%20314%20§%206); \]

## 43.23.320 - Pollinator health task force. (Expires January 1, 2024.)
1. The department shall create and chair a pollinator health task force. The department shall appoint the members of the task force, which must include, but is not limited to, representatives of the following interests, organizations, and state agencies:

    a. The conservation commission;

    b. The department of natural resources;

    c. The department of fish and wildlife;

    d. The state parks and recreation commission;

    e. The Washington state department of transportation;

    f. The state noxious weed control board;

    g. The tree fruit industry;

    h. The seed industry;

    i. The berry industry;

    j. Other agricultural industries dependent upon pollinators;

    k. Washington State University;

    l. Pesticide distributors and applicators;

    m. Conservation organizations;

    n. Organizations representing beekeepers or apiarists;

    o. A member of the public from west of the crest of the Cascade mountains; and

    p. A member of the public from east of the crest of the Cascade mountains.

2. One or more representatives of Washington tribes must also be invited to participate on the task force.

3. One youth representative from an organization that encourages students to engage in agricultural education must also be invited to participate on the task force when available.

4. The task force shall build upon existing pollinator research and pollinator habitat plans at the national and state level including, but not limited to, the state-managed pollinator plan, to assist with the development of an implementation plan to implement the state pollinator health strategy.

5. The task force shall assist, as practicable, with implementation of the recommendations of the task force submitted to the legislature in November 2020.

6. The department shall provide the implementation plan to the appropriate committees of the senate and house of representatives by December 31, 2021, in compliance with RCW 43.01.036. The implementation plan must include the task force's evaluation and development of protocols that would increase communications between beekeepers, farmers and growers, and pesticide applicators including, but not limited to, education and outreach to beekeepers, farmers and growers, and pesticide applicators.

7. The department shall provide information related to implementation of the state pollinator health strategy and a recommendation of whether to extend the task force beyond January 1, 2024, to the appropriate committees of the senate and house of representatives by December 1, 2022, in compliance with RCW 43.01.036.

8. This section expires January 1, 2024.

\[ [2021 c 278 § 2](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/2021-22/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/Senate/5253-S2.SL.pdf?cite=2021%20c%20278%20§%202); \]


## **43.23.XXX - TBD**
**
1. The department shall create and chair a pollinator health task force. The department shall appoint the members of the task force, which must include, but is not limited to, representatives of the following interests, organizations, and state agencies:

    a. The conservation commission;

    b. The department of natural resources;

    c. The department of fish and wildlife;

    d. The state parks and recreation commission;

    e. The Washington state department of transportation;

    f. The state noxious weed control board;

    g. The tree fruit industry;

    h. The seed industry;

    i. The berry industry;

    j. Other agricultural industries dependent upon pollinators;

    k. Washington State University;

    l. Pesticide distributors and applicators;

    m. Conservation organizations;

    n. Organizations representing beekeepers or apiarists;

    o. A member of the public from west of the crest of the Cascade mountains; and

    p. A member of the public from east of the crest of the Cascade mountains.

2. One or more representatives of Washington tribes must also be invited to participate on the task force.

3. One youth representative from an organization that encourages students to engage in agricultural education must also be invited to participate on the task force when available.

4. The task force shall build upon existing pollinator research and pollinator habitat plans at the national and state level including, but not limited to, the state-managed pollinator plan, to assist with the development of an implementation plan to implement the state pollinator health strategy.

5. The task force shall assist, as practicable, with implementation of the recommendations of the task force submitted to the legislature in November 2020.

6. The department shall provide the implementation plan to the appropriate committees of the senate and house of representatives by December 31, 2021, in compliance with RCW 43.01.036.

7. The department shall provide information related to implementation of the state pollinator health strategy and a recommendation of whether to extend the task force beyond January 1, 2024, to the appropriate committees of the senate and house of representatives by December 1, 2022, in compliance with RCW 43.01.036.

8. This section expires January 1, 2024.


[ 2021 c XXX § 2; ]**
