# 35A.16 - Reduction of city limits.
* [35A.16.001 - Actions subject to review by boundary review board.](#35a16001---actions-subject-to-review-by-boundary-review-board)
* [35A.16.010 - Petition or resolution for election.](#35a16010---petition-or-resolution-for-election)
* [35A.16.030 - Abstract of vote.](#35a16030---abstract-of-vote)
* [35A.16.040 - Effective date of reduction.](#35a16040---effective-date-of-reduction)
* [35A.16.050 - Recording of ordinance and plat on effective date of reduction.](#35a16050---recording-of-ordinance-and-plat-on-effective-date-of-reduction)
* [35A.16.060 - Effect of exclusion as to liability for indebtedness.](#35a16060---effect-of-exclusion-as-to-liability-for-indebtedness)
* [35A.16.070 - Franchises within territory excluded.](#35a16070---franchises-within-territory-excluded)
* [35A.16.080 - Exclusion of agricultural land from the incorporated area of a code city.](#35a16080---exclusion-of-agricultural-land-from-the-incorporated-area-of-a-code-city)
## 35A.16.001 - Actions subject to review by boundary review board.
Actions taken under chapter 35A.16 RCW may be subject to potential review by a boundary review board under chapter 36.93 RCW.

\[ [1989 c 84 § 40](http://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1989c84.pdf?cite=1989%20c%2084%20§%2040); \]

## 35A.16.010 - Petition or resolution for election.
Upon the filing of a petition which is sufficient as determined by RCW 35A.01.040 praying for the exclusion from the boundaries of a code city of an area described by metes and bounds or by reference to a recorded plat or government survey, signed by qualified voters of the city in number equal to not less than ten percent of the number of votes cast at the last general municipal election, the legislative body of the code city shall cause the question to be submitted to the voters. As an alternate method, such a proposal for exclusion from the code city of a described area may be submitted to the voters by resolution of the legislative body. The question shall be submitted at the next general municipal election if one is to be held within one hundred and eighty days or at a special election called for that purpose not less than ninety days nor more than one hundred and eighty days after the certification of sufficiency of the petition or the passage of the resolution. The petition or resolution shall set out and describe the territory to be excluded from the code city, together with the boundaries of the code city as it will exist after such change is made.

\[ [1967 ex.s. c 119 § 35A.16.010](http://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1967ex1c119.pdf?cite=1967%20ex.s.%20c%20119%20§%2035A.16.010); \]

## 35A.16.030 - Abstract of vote.
If three-fifths of the votes cast on the proposition favor the reduction of the corporate limits, the county auditor shall make and transmit to the office of the secretary of state a certified abstract of the vote.

\[ [1994 c 223 § 40](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/1993-94/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/House/2278-S.SL.pdf?cite=1994%20c%20223%20§%2040); [1967 ex.s. c 119 § 35A.16.030](http://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1967ex1c119.pdf?cite=1967%20ex.s.%20c%20119%20§%2035A.16.030); \]

## 35A.16.040 - Effective date of reduction.
Promptly after the filing of the abstract of votes with the secretary of state the legislative body shall adopt an ordinance defining and fixing the corporate limits after excluding the area as determined by the election. The ordinance shall also describe the excluded territory by metes and bounds or by reference to a recorded plat or government survey and declare it no longer a part of the code city.

\[ [1967 ex.s. c 119 § 35A.16.040](http://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1967ex1c119.pdf?cite=1967%20ex.s.%20c%20119%20§%2035A.16.040); \]

## 35A.16.050 - Recording of ordinance and plat on effective date of reduction.
Upon the effective date of the ordinance a certified copy thereof together with a map showing the corporate limits as altered shall be filed and recorded in the office of the county auditor of the county in which the code city is situated, and thereupon the boundaries shall be as set forth therein.

\[ [1967 ex.s. c 119 § 35A.16.050](http://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1967ex1c119.pdf?cite=1967%20ex.s.%20c%20119%20§%2035A.16.050); \]

## 35A.16.060 - Effect of exclusion as to liability for indebtedness.
The exclusion of an area from the boundaries of the code city shall not exempt any real property therein from taxation for the purpose of paying any indebtedness of the code city existing at the time of its exclusion and the interest thereon.

\[ [1967 ex.s. c 119 § 35A.16.060](http://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1967ex1c119.pdf?cite=1967%20ex.s.%20c%20119%20§%2035A.16.060); \]

## 35A.16.070 - Franchises within territory excluded.
In regard to franchises previously granted for operation of any public service business or facility within the territory excluded from a code city by proceedings under this chapter, the rights, obligations, and duties of the legislative body of the county or other political subdivision having jurisdiction over such territory and of the franchise holder shall be as provided in RCW 35.02.160, relating to inclusion of territory by an incorporation, and such a franchise shall be canceled and a new franchise issued by the legislative body having jurisdiction, as therein provided.

\[ [1967 ex.s. c 119 § 35A.16.070](http://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1967ex1c119.pdf?cite=1967%20ex.s.%20c%20119%20§%2035A.16.070); \]

## 35A.16.080 - Exclusion of agricultural land from the incorporated area of a code city.
Proceedings for excluding agricultural land from the boundaries of a charter code city or noncharter code city may be commenced by the filing of a petition which is sufficient as determined by RCW 35A.01.040 by property owners of the agricultural land proposed to be excluded, in the following manner which is alternative to other methods provided in this chapter:

1. A petition for exclusion of agricultural land from the incorporated area of a code city shall be filed with the legislative body of the municipality. The petition for exclusion must be signed by the owners of not less than one hundred percent of the agricultural land for which exclusion is sought and, if residents exist within the area proposed for exclusion, a majority of the registered voters residing in the area for which exclusion is petitioned.

2. The petition shall set forth a legal description of the territory proposed to be excluded and shall be accompanied by a drawing that outlines the boundaries of the territory sought to be excluded.

3. When a petition for exclusion that meets the requirements of this section and RCW 35A.01.040 is filed with the legislative body of the code city, the legislative body shall set a date, not later than sixty days after the filing of the request, for a public hearing thereon and cause notice of the hearing to be published in one or more issues of a newspaper of general circulation in the city. The notice shall also be posted in three public places within the territory proposed for exclusion, and shall specify the time and place of hearing and invite interested persons to appear and voice approval or disapproval of the exclusion.

4. Following the hearing, if the legislative body determines to effect the exclusion from city boundaries, they shall do so by ordinance. The ordinance may exclude all or any portion of the proposed territory but may not include in the exclusion any territory not described in the petition. The ordinance shall contain a legal description of the territory and declare it no longer a part of the code city.

\[ [2005 c 77 § 1](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/2005-06/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/Senate/5589.SL.pdf?cite=2005%20c%2077%20§%201); \]

