# 38.04 - General provisions.
* [38.04.010 - General definitions.](#3804010---general-definitions)
* [38.04.020 - "Officer," "enlisted persons" defined—Convictions and punishments.](#3804020---officer-enlisted-persons-definedconvictions-and-punishments)
* [38.04.030 - Composition of the militia.](#3804030---composition-of-the-militia)
* [38.04.040 - Composition of organized militia.](#3804040---composition-of-organized-militia)
## 38.04.010 - General definitions.
When used in this title, the following words, terms, phrases shall have the following meaning:

The word "militia" shall mean the military forces provided for in the Constitution and laws of the state of Washington.

The term "organized militia" shall be the general term to include both state and national guard and whenever used applies equally to all such organizations.

The term "national guard" shall mean that part of the military force of the state that is organized, equipped and federally recognized under the provisions of the national defense act of the United States, and, in the event the national guard is called into federal service or in the event the state guard or any part or individual member thereof is called into active state service by the commander-in-chief, the term shall also include the "Washington state guard" or any temporary organization set up in times of emergency to replace either the "national guard" or "state guard" while in actual service of the United States.

The term "state guard" shall mean that part of the military forces of the state that is organized, equipped, and recognized under the provisions of the State Defense Forces Act of the United States (32 U.S.C. Sec. 109, as amended).

The term "active state service" or "active training duty" shall be construed to be any service on behalf of the state, or at encampments whether ordered by state or federal authority or any other duty requiring the entire time of any organization or person except when called or drafted into the federal service by the president of the United States.

The term "inactive duty" shall include periods of drill and such other training and service not requiring the entire time of the organization or person, as may be required under state or federal laws, regulations, or orders, including travel to and from such duty.

The terms "in service of United States" and "not in service of United States" as used herein shall be understood to mean the same as such terms when used in the national defense act of congress and amendments thereto.

The term "military" refers to any or all of the armed forces.

The term "armory" refers to any state-owned building, warehouse, vehicle storage compound, organizational maintenance shop or other facility and the lands appurtenant thereto used by the Washington national guard for the storage and maintenance of arms or military equipment or the administration or training of the organized militia.

The term "member" refers to a soldier or airman of the organized militia.

\[ [1991 c 43 § 1](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/1991-92/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/Senate/5586.SL.pdf?cite=1991%20c%2043%20§%201); [1989 c 19 § 1](http://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1989c19.pdf?cite=1989%20c%2019%20§%201); [1963 c 220 § 133](http://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1963c220.pdf?cite=1963%20c%20220%20§%20133); [1943 c 130 § 12](http://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1943c130.pdf?cite=1943%20c%20130%20§%2012); Rem. Supp. 1943 § 8603-12; 1917 c 107 §§ 1, part, 3, part; 1909 c 134 § 10, part; 1895 c 108 § 10, part; \]

## 38.04.020 - "Officer," "enlisted persons" defined—Convictions and punishments.
Whenever used in this title, the word "officer" shall be understood to designate commissioned and warrant officers, and the words "enlisted persons" shall be understood to designate members of the organized militia of Washington other than commissioned or warrant officers. The convictions and punishments mentioned unless otherwise specifically designated, shall be understood to be respectively convictions and punishments by military courts.

\[ [2009 c 549 § 1011](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/2009-10/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/Senate/5038.SL.pdf?cite=2009%20c%20549%20§%201011); [1989 c 19 § 2](http://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1989c19.pdf?cite=1989%20c%2019%20§%202); [1943 c 130 § 80](http://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1943c130.pdf?cite=1943%20c%20130%20§%2080); Rem. Supp. 1943 § 8603-80; [1917 c 107 § 60](http://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1917c107.pdf?cite=1917%20c%20107%20§%2060); \]

## 38.04.030 - Composition of the militia.
The militia of the state of Washington shall consist of all able bodied citizens of the United States and all other able bodied persons who have declared their intention to become citizens of the United States, residing within this state, who shall be more than eighteen years of age, and shall include all persons who are members of the national guard and the state guard, and said militia shall be divided into two classes, the organized militia and the unorganized militia.

\[ [1989 c 19 § 3](http://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1989c19.pdf?cite=1989%20c%2019%20§%203); [1973 1st ex.s. c 154 § 55](http://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1973ex1c154.pdf?cite=1973%201st%20ex.s.%20c%20154%20§%2055); [1963 c 74 § 1](http://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1963c74.pdf?cite=1963%20c%2074%20§%201); [1943 c 130 § 2](http://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1943c130.pdf?cite=1943%20c%20130%20§%202); Rem. Supp. 1943 § 8603-2; [1917 c 107 § 1](http://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1917c107.pdf?cite=1917%20c%20107%20§%201); [1909 c 134 § 2](http://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1909c134.pdf?cite=1909%20c%20134%20§%202); [1895 c 108 § 2](http://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1895c108.pdf?cite=1895%20c%20108%20§%202); \]

## 38.04.040 - Composition of organized militia.
The organized militia of Washington shall consist of the commissioned officers, warrant officers, enlisted persons, organizations, staffs, corps, and departments of the regularly commissioned, warranted and enlisted militia of the state, organized and maintained pursuant to law. Its numerical strength, composition, distribution, organization, arms, uniforms, equipment, training and discipline shall be prescribed by the governor in conformity with, and subject to the limitations imposed by the laws and regulations of the United States and the laws of this state: PROVIDED, HOWEVER, That the minimum enlisted strength of the organized militia of this state shall never be less than two thousand. The organized militia may include persons residing outside the state of Washington.

\[ [1989 c 19 § 4](http://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1989c19.pdf?cite=1989%20c%2019%20§%204); [1943 c 130 § 4](http://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1943c130.pdf?cite=1943%20c%20130%20§%204); Rem. Supp. 1943 § 8603-4; 1917 c 107 § 3. Cf. 1909 c 108 § 10, part; 1895 c 108 § 10, part; \]

