# 79A.50 - Public lands for state or city parks.
* [79A.50.010 - Use of public lands for state or city park purposes—Regents' consent, when.](#79a50010---use-of-public-lands-for-state-or-city-park-purposesregents-consent-when)
* [79A.50.020 - Use of public lands for state or city park purposes—Rental—Deposit of rent.](#79a50020---use-of-public-lands-for-state-or-city-park-purposesrentaldeposit-of-rent)
* [79A.50.030 - Use of public lands for state or city park purposes—Removal of timber—Consent—Compensation.](#79a50030---use-of-public-lands-for-state-or-city-park-purposesremoval-of-timberconsentcompensation)
* [79A.50.040 - State lands used for state parks—Trust lands, payment of full market value rental—Other lands, rent free.](#79a50040---state-lands-used-for-state-parkstrust-lands-payment-of-full-market-value-rentalother-lands-rent-free)
* [79A.50.050 - State lands used for state parks—Trust lands—Determination of full market value by board of natural resources.](#79a50050---state-lands-used-for-state-parkstrust-landsdetermination-of-full-market-value-by-board-of-natural-resources)
* [79A.50.060 - State lands used for state parks—Trust lands—Full market value rental defined—Factor in determination.](#79a50060---state-lands-used-for-state-parkstrust-landsfull-market-value-rental-definedfactor-in-determination)
* [79A.50.070 - State lands used for state parks—Certain funds appropriated for rental to be deposited without deduction for management purposes.](#79a50070---state-lands-used-for-state-parkscertain-funds-appropriated-for-rental-to-be-deposited-without-deduction-for-management-purposes)
* [79A.50.080 - Utilization of public lands for outdoor recreational and other beneficial public uses—State agency cooperation.](#79a50080---utilization-of-public-lands-for-outdoor-recreational-and-other-beneficial-public-usesstate-agency-cooperation)
* [79A.50.090 - Department estopped from certain actions respecting state parks without concurrence of commission.](#79a50090---department-estopped-from-certain-actions-respecting-state-parks-without-concurrence-of-commission)
* [79A.50.100 - State trust lands—Withdrawal—Revocation or modification of withdrawal when used for recreational purposes—Hearing—Notice—Board to determine most beneficial use in accordance with policy.](#79a50100---state-trust-landswithdrawalrevocation-or-modification-of-withdrawal-when-used-for-recreational-purposeshearingnoticeboard-to-determine-most-beneficial-use-in-accordance-with-policy)
* [79A.50.110 - Exchange of lands to secure private lands for parks and recreation purposes.](#79a50110---exchange-of-lands-to-secure-private-lands-for-parks-and-recreation-purposes)
## 79A.50.010 - Use of public lands for state or city park purposes—Regents' consent, when.
The department of natural resources is hereby authorized to withdraw from sale or lease, and reserve for state or city park purposes, public lands selected by the state parks and recreation commission, for such time as it shall determine will be for the best interests of the state and any particular fund for which said public lands are being held in trust: PROVIDED, None of the lands selected under the provisions of section 3, chapter 91, Laws of 1903, shall be withdrawn or reserved hereunder without the consent of the board of regents of the University of Washington; except that the consent of the board of regents of the University of Washington shall not be required with regard to any such lands which are situated within the corporate limits of any city or town and are presently zoned for residential use.

\[ [1969 ex.s. c 129 § 2](http://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1969ex1c129.pdf?cite=1969%20ex.s.%20c%20129%20§%202); [1951 c 26 § 1](http://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1951c26.pdf?cite=1951%20c%2026%20§%201); \]

## 79A.50.020 - Use of public lands for state or city park purposes—Rental—Deposit of rent.
The department of natural resources and the state parks and recreation commission shall fix a yearly reasonable rental for the use of public lands reserved for state park purposes, which shall be paid by the commission to the department for the particular fund for which the lands had been held in trust, and which rent shall be transmitted to the state treasurer for deposit in such fund.

\[ [1988 c 128 § 59](http://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1988c128.pdf?cite=1988%20c%20128%20§%2059); [1951 c 26 § 2](http://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1951c26.pdf?cite=1951%20c%2026%20§%202); \]

## 79A.50.030 - Use of public lands for state or city park purposes—Removal of timber—Consent—Compensation.
No merchantable timber shall be cut or removed from lands reserved for state park purposes without the consent of the department of natural resources and without payment to the particular fund for which the lands are held in trust, the reasonable value thereof as fixed by the department.

\[ [1988 c 128 § 60](http://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1988c128.pdf?cite=1988%20c%20128%20§%2060); [1951 c 26 § 3](http://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1951c26.pdf?cite=1951%20c%2026%20§%203); \]

## 79A.50.040 - State lands used for state parks—Trust lands, payment of full market value rental—Other lands, rent free.
The parks and recreation commission shall pay to the department of natural resources the full market value rental for state-owned lands acquired in trust from the United States that are used for state parks. All other state lands used by the parks and recreation commission for state parks shall be rent free.

\[ [1967 ex.s. c 63 § 4](http://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1967ex1c63.pdf?cite=1967%20ex.s.%20c%2063%20§%204); \]

## 79A.50.050 - State lands used for state parks—Trust lands—Determination of full market value by board of natural resources.
The full market value shall be determined by the board of natural resources for trust lands used for state park purposes.

\[ [1969 ex.s. c 189 § 1](http://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1969ex1c189.pdf?cite=1969%20ex.s.%20c%20189%20§%201); [1967 ex.s. c 63 § 5](http://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1967ex1c63.pdf?cite=1967%20ex.s.%20c%2063%20§%205); \]

## 79A.50.060 - State lands used for state parks—Trust lands—Full market value rental defined—Factor in determination.
The full market value rental for trust lands used by the parks and recreation commission shall be a percentage of the full market value of the land and the board of natural resources shall consider in its deliberations the average percentage of return realized by the state during the preceding fiscal biennium on the invested common school permanent fund.

\[ [1969 ex.s. c 189 § 2](http://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1969ex1c189.pdf?cite=1969%20ex.s.%20c%20189%20§%202); [1967 ex.s. c 63 § 6](http://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1967ex1c63.pdf?cite=1967%20ex.s.%20c%2063%20§%206); \]

## 79A.50.070 - State lands used for state parks—Certain funds appropriated for rental to be deposited without deduction for management purposes.
Any funds appropriated to the state parks and recreation commission for payment of rental for use of state lands reserved for state park purposes during the 1969-71 biennium and received by the department of natural resources shall be deposited by the department to the applicable trust land accounts without the deduction normally applied to such revenues for management purposes.

\[ [1969 ex.s. c 189 § 3](http://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1969ex1c189.pdf?cite=1969%20ex.s.%20c%20189%20§%203); \]

## 79A.50.080 - Utilization of public lands for outdoor recreational and other beneficial public uses—State agency cooperation.
In order to maximize outdoor recreation opportunities for the people of the state of Washington and allow for the full utilization of state owned land, all state departments and agencies are authorized and directed to cooperate together in fully utilizing the public lands. All state departments and agencies, vested with statutory authority for utilizing land for outdoor recreation or other beneficial public uses, are authorized and directed to apply to another state department or agency holding suitable public lands for permission of use. The department or agency applied to is authorized and directed to grant permission of use to the applying department or agency if the public use of the public land would be consistent with the existing and continuing principal uses. Trust lands may be withdrawn for outdoor recreation purposes from sale or lease for other purposes by the department of natural resources pursuant to this section subject to the constraints imposed by the Washington state Constitution and the federal enabling statute. The decision regarding such consistency with existing and continuing principal uses shall be made by the agency owning or controlling such lands and which decision shall be final.

\[ [1969 ex.s. c 247 § 1](http://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1969ex1c247.pdf?cite=1969%20ex.s.%20c%20247%20§%201); \]

## 79A.50.090 - Department estopped from certain actions respecting state parks without concurrence of commission.
The department of natural resources shall not rescind the withdrawal of public land in any existing and future state park nor sell any timber or other valuable material therefrom or grant any right-of-way or easement thereon, except as provided in the withdrawal order or for off-site drilling, without the concurrence of the state parks and recreation commission.

The department of natural resources shall have reasonable access across such lands in order to reach other public lands administered by the department of natural resources.

\[ [1969 ex.s. c 247 § 2](http://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1969ex1c247.pdf?cite=1969%20ex.s.%20c%20247%20§%202); \]

## 79A.50.100 - State trust lands—Withdrawal—Revocation or modification of withdrawal when used for recreational purposes—Hearing—Notice—Board to determine most beneficial use in accordance with policy.
1. A public hearing may be held prior to any withdrawal of state trust lands and shall be held prior to any revocation of withdrawal or modification of withdrawal of state trust lands used for recreational purposes by the department of natural resources or by other state agencies.

2. The department shall cause notice of the withdrawal, revocation of withdrawal or modification of withdrawal of state trust lands as described in subsection (1) of this section to be published by advertisement once a week for four weeks prior to the public hearing in at least one newspaper published and of general circulation in the county or counties in which the state trust lands are situated, and by causing a copy of said notice to be posted in a conspicuous place in the department's Olympia office, in the district office in which the land is situated, and in the office of the county auditor in the county where the land is situated thirty days prior to the public hearing. The notice shall specify the time and place of the public hearing and shall describe with particularity each parcel of state trust lands involved in said hearing.

3. The board of natural resources shall administer the hearing according to its prescribed rules and regulations.

4. The board of natural resources shall determine the most beneficial use or combination of uses of the state trust lands. Its decision will be conclusive as to the matter: PROVIDED, HOWEVER, That said decisions as to uses shall conform to applicable state plans and policy guidelines adopted by the *department of community, trade, and economic development.

\[ [1995 c 399 § 209](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/1995-96/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/House/1014.SL.pdf?cite=1995%20c%20399%20§%20209); [1985 c 6 § 24](http://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1985c6.pdf?cite=1985%20c%206%20§%2024); [1969 ex.s. c 129 § 1](http://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1969ex1c129.pdf?cite=1969%20ex.s.%20c%20129%20§%201); \]

## 79A.50.110 - Exchange of lands to secure private lands for parks and recreation purposes.
For the purpose of securing and preserving privately owned lands for parks and recreation purposes, the department of natural resources is authorized, with the advice and approval of the state board of natural resources, to exchange any state lands of equal value for such lands. Lands acquired by exchange as herein provided shall be withdrawn from lease and sale and reserved for park and recreation purposes.

\[ [1967 ex.s. c 64 § 2](http://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1967ex1c64.pdf?cite=1967%20ex.s.%20c%2064%20§%202); \]

