# Senate Bill 5248

[Source](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/2021-22/Xml/Bills/Senate%20Bills/5248.xml)
## Section 1
The legislature finds that there is a statewide need to standardize rights and responsibilities of individuals confined in county, municipal, and juvenile detention facilities throughout the state. The legislature recognizes that the Washington corrections standards board previously existed from between 1981 and 1987, providing, monitoring, and enforcing jail operating standards. The legislature further finds that the elimination of the board has led to a reduction in consistency in jail standards and elimination of statewide enforcement and inspection mechanisms. The legislature finds that lack of a regulatory body with oversight powers has led to an adult jail system lacking in both transparency and oversight. The legislature concludes that this has had a negative impact upon those confined in such facilities. This negative impact has detrimentally affected the health, safety, and living conditions of those experiencing incarceration in jails.
The legislature finds that the living conditions of jails play an important role in the reentry process and that successful reentry has a tangible, positive effect upon reduced recidivism and overall public safety. The legislature finds that the mental and economic trauma imposed by substandard living conditions in such facilities can have a negative impact upon rehabilitation efforts. The legislature recognizes that in 2016, 58 percent of people entering jails in Washington had mental health treatment needs, 61 percent had substance use disorder treatment needs, and 41 percent had co-occurring disorder indicators. The legislature intends to improve access to needed treatment for these populations. The legislature finds that failure to address these challenges can result in public safety concerns for the individual and staff providing services. The legislature further finds that standardizing this element of the justice system through uniform jail standards will result in better care, fewer negative incidents, and better staff safety.
The legislature finds that promoting family and community connection and economic stability for a family while a loved one is incarcerated are important factors in successful reentry. The legislature further finds that health and well-being are also critical factors for successful reentry and therefore key to reducing recidivism. The legislature therefore finds restoration of a statewide jail oversight board is in the interest of all Washingtonians.
Therefore, it is the intent of the legislature to convene a task force to collect data and make recommendations regarding the restoration of a statewide regulatory authority for mandatory jail standards, data collection, and inspection and enforcement of uniform jail standards for the health, safety, and welfare of the public, those who are confined, and staff.

## Section 3
If specific funding for the purposes of this act, referencing this act by bill or chapter number, is not provided by June 30, 2021, in the omnibus appropriations act, this act is null and void.
