# 42.04 - General provisions.
* [42.04.020 - Eligibility to hold office.](#4204020---eligibility-to-hold-office)
* [42.04.040 - Proceedings to impeach, etc., preserved.](#4204040---proceedings-to-impeach-etc-preserved)
* [42.04.060 - Business hours—Posting on website.](#4204060---business-hoursposting-on-website)
* [42.04.070 - Compensation for unofficial services.](#4204070---compensation-for-unofficial-services)
## 42.04.020 - Eligibility to hold office.
That no person shall be competent to qualify for or hold any elective public office within the state of Washington, or any county, district, precinct, school district, municipal corporation or other district or political subdivision, unless he or she be a citizen of the United States and state of Washington and an elector of such county, district, precinct, school district, municipality or other district or political subdivision.

\[ [2012 c 117 § 94](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/2011-12/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/Senate/6095.SL.pdf?cite=2012%20c%20117%20§%2094); [1919 c 139 § 1](https://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1919c139.pdf?cite=1919%20c%20139%20§%201); RRS § 9929. FORMER PART OF SECTION: Code 1881 § 3050 codified as RCW  42.04.021; \]

## 42.04.040 - Proceedings to impeach, etc., preserved.
The omission to specify or affirm in *this act any ground of forfeiture of a public office or other trust or special authority conferred by law, or any power conferred by law to impeach, remove, depose or suspend any public officer or other person holding any trust, appointment or other special authority conferred by law, shall not affect such forfeiture or power, or any proceeding authorized by law to carry into effect such impeachment, removal, deposition or suspension.

\[ [1909 c 249 § 45](https://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1909c249.pdf?cite=1909%20c%20249%20§%2045); RRS § 2297; \]

## 42.04.060 - Business hours—Posting on website.
Except as provided in section 3, chapter 32, Laws of 2010 1st sp. sess., all state elective and appointive officers shall keep their offices open for the transaction of business for a minimum of forty hours per week, except weeks that include state legal holidays. Customary business hours must be posted on the agency or office's website and made known by other means designed to provide the public with notice.

\[ [2010 1st sp.s. c 32 § 5](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/2009-10/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/Senate/6503-S.SL.pdf?cite=2010%201st%20sp.s.%20c%2032%20§%205); [2009 c 428 § 1](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/2009-10/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/Senate/6104.SL.pdf?cite=2009%20c%20428%20§%201); [1973 2nd ex.s. c 1 § 2](https://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1973ex2c1.pdf?cite=1973%202nd%20ex.s.%20c%201%20§%202); [1955 ex.s. c 9 § 3](https://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1955ex1c9.pdf?cite=1955%20ex.s.%20c%209%20§%203); 1951 c 100 §§ 3, 4; [1941 c 113 § 1](https://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1941c113.pdf?cite=1941%20c%20113%20§%201); Rem. Supp. 1941 § 9963-1; \]

## 42.04.070 - Compensation for unofficial services.
That the directors, trustees and commissioners of state institutions in this state, serving as such without any compensation, shall not be precluded by reason of holding such offices from receiving compensation for services not official rendered without being procured or brought about by use of such official position, or by reason thereof, but such officers shall be allowed to receive such reasonable compensation for services not official or connected with their respective offices as they would otherwise be allowed were they not such officers.

\[ [1891 c 109 § 1](https://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1891c109.pdf?cite=1891%20c%20109%20§%201); RRS § 10966; \]

