# 35.14 - Community municipal corporations.
* [35.14.020 - Community council—Membership—Election—Terms. (Effective until January 1, 2023.)](#3514020---community-councilmembershipelectionterms-effective-until-january-1-2023)
* [35.14.030 - Community council—Employees—Office—Officers—Quorum—Meetings—Compensation and expenses. (Effective until January 1, 2023.)](#3514030---community-councilemployeesofficeofficersquorummeetingscompensation-and-expenses-effective-until-january-1-2023)
* [35.14.040 - Ordinances or resolutions of city applying to land, buildings or structures within corporation, effectiveness—Zoning ordinances, resolutions or land use controls to remain in effect upon annexation or consolidation—Comprehensive plan. (Effective until January 1, 2023.)](#3514040---ordinances-or-resolutions-of-city-applying-to-land-buildings-or-structures-within-corporation-effectivenesszoning-ordinances-resolutions-or-land-use-controls-to-remain-in-effect-upon-annexation-or-consolidationcomprehensive-plan-effective-until-january-1-2023)
* [35.14.050 - Powers and duties of community municipal corporation. (Effective until January 1, 2023.)](#3514050---powers-and-duties-of-community-municipal-corporation-effective-until-january-1-2023)
* [35.14.060 - Term of existence of community municipal corporation. (Effective until January 1, 2023.)](#3514060---term-of-existence-of-community-municipal-corporation-effective-until-january-1-2023)
## 35.14.020 - Community council—Membership—Election—Terms. (Effective until January 1, 2023.)
A community municipal corporation shall be governed by a community council composed of five members. Initial councilmembers shall be elected concurrently with the annexation election to consecutively numbered positions from qualified electors residing within the service area. Declarations of candidacy and withdrawals shall be in the same manner as is provided for members of the city council or other legislative body of the city to which annexation is proposed. Subsequent council membership shall be the same in number as the initial council and such members shall be elected to consecutively numbered positions at the continuation election pursuant to RCW 35.14.060 from qualified electors residing within the service area.

 Terms of original councilmembers shall be coexistent with the original term of existence of the community municipal corporation and until their successors are elected and qualified. Vacancies in any council shall be filled for the remainder of the unexpired term by a majority vote of the remaining members.

\[ [1985 c 281 § 25](https://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1985c281.pdf?cite=1985%20c%20281%20§%2025); [1967 c 73 § 2](https://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1967c73.pdf?cite=1967%20c%2073%20§%202); \]

## 35.14.030 - Community council—Employees—Office—Officers—Quorum—Meetings—Compensation and expenses. (Effective until January 1, 2023.)
Each community council shall be staffed by a deputy to the city clerk of the city with which the service area is consolidated or annexed and shall be provided with such other clerical and technical assistance and a properly equipped office as may be necessary to carry out its functions.

Each community council shall elect a chair and vice chair from its membership. A majority of the council shall constitute a quorum. Each action of the community municipal corporation shall be by resolution approved by vote of the majority of all the members of the community council. Meetings shall be held at such times and places as provided in the rules of the community council. Members of the community council shall receive no compensation.

The necessary expenses of the community council shall be budgeted and paid by the city.

\[ [2009 c 549 § 2012](https://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/2009-10/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/Senate/5038.SL.pdf?cite=2009%20c%20549%20§%202012); [1967 c 73 § 3](https://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1967c73.pdf?cite=1967%20c%2073%20§%203); \]

## 35.14.040 - Ordinances or resolutions of city applying to land, buildings or structures within corporation, effectiveness—Zoning ordinances, resolutions or land use controls to remain in effect upon annexation or consolidation—Comprehensive plan. (Effective until January 1, 2023.)
The adoption, approval, enactment, amendment, granting or authorization by the city council or commission of any ordinance or resolution applying to land, buildings or structures within any community council corporation shall become effective within such community municipal corporation either on approval by the community council, or by failure of the community council to disapprove within sixty days of final enactment, with respect to the following:

1. Comprehensive plan;

2. Zoning ordinance;

3. Conditional use permit, special exception or variance;

4. Subdivision ordinance;

5. Subdivision plat;

6. Planned unit development.

Disapproval by the community council shall not affect the application of any ordinance or resolution affecting areas outside the community municipal corporation.

Upon annexation or consolidation, pending the effective enactment or amendment of a zoning or land use control ordinance, without disapproval of the community municipal corporation, affecting land, buildings, or structures within a community municipal corporation, the zoning ordinance, resolution or land use controls applicable to the annexed or consolidated area, prior to the annexation or consolidation, shall remain in effect within the community municipal corporation and be enforced by the city to which the area is annexed or consolidated.

Whenever the comprehensive plan of the city, insofar as it affects the area of the community municipal corporation has been submitted as part of an annexation proposition and approved by the voters of the area proposed for annexation pursuant to chapter 88, Laws of 1965 extraordinary session, such action shall have the same force and effect as approval by the community council of the comprehensive plan, zoning ordinance and subdivision ordinance.

\[ [1967 c 73 § 4](https://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1967c73.pdf?cite=1967%20c%2073%20§%204); \]

## 35.14.050 - Powers and duties of community municipal corporation. (Effective until January 1, 2023.)
In addition to powers and duties relating to approval of zoning regulations and restrictions as set forth in RCW 35.14.040, a community municipal corporation acting through its community council may:

1. Make recommendations concerning any proposed comprehensive plan or other proposal which directly or indirectly affects the use of property or land within the service area;

2. Provide a forum for consideration of the conservation, improvement or development of property or land within the service area; and

3. Advise, consult, and cooperate with the legislative authority of the city on any local matters directly or indirectly affecting the service area.

\[ [1967 c 73 § 5](https://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1967c73.pdf?cite=1967%20c%2073%20§%205); \]

## 35.14.060 - Term of existence of community municipal corporation. (Effective until January 1, 2023.)
The terms of existence of any community municipal corporation shall be for four years or until 30 days after June 9, 2022, whichever is sooner.

\[ [2022 c 26 § 1](https://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/2021-22/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/House/1769.SL.pdf?cite=2022%20c%2026%20§%201); [2009 c 549 § 2013](https://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/2009-10/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/Senate/5038.SL.pdf?cite=2009%20c%20549%20§%202013); [1967 c 73 § 6](https://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1967c73.pdf?cite=1967%20c%2073%20§%206); \]

