# 35.06 - Advancement of classification.
* [35.06.010 - Population requirements for advance in classification.](#3506010---population-requirements-for-advance-in-classification)
* [35.06.070 - Procedure for advancement—Ballot proposition—Notification of secretary of state.](#3506070---procedure-for-advancementballot-propositionnotification-of-secretary-of-state)
* [35.06.080 - Election of new officers.](#3506080---election-of-new-officers)
## 35.06.010 - Population requirements for advance in classification.
A city or town which has at least ten thousand inhabitants may become a first-class city by adopting a charter under Article XI, section 10, of the state Constitution in chapter 35.22 RCW.

A town which has at least fifteen hundred inhabitants may reorganize and advance its classification to become a second-class city as provided in this chapter.

\[ [1994 c 81 § 7](https://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/1993-94/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/House/2244.SL.pdf?cite=1994%20c%2081%20§%207); [1965 c 7 § 35.06.010](https://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1965c7.pdf?cite=1965%20c%207%20§%2035.06.010); [1955 c 319 § 6](https://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1955c319.pdf?cite=1955%20c%20319%20§%206); prior:  1907 c 248 § 1, part; 1890 p 140 § 12, part; RRS § 8933, part.   1890 p 141 § 14; RRS § 8936; \]

## 35.06.070 - Procedure for advancement—Ballot proposition—Notification of secretary of state.
A ballot proposition authorizing an advancement in classification of a town to a second-class city shall be submitted to the voters of the town if either: (1) Petitions proposing the advancement are submitted to the town clerk that have been signed by voters of the town equal in number to at least ten percent of the voters of the town voting at the last municipal general election; or (2) the town council adopts a resolution proposing the advancement. The clerk shall immediately forward the petitions to the county auditor who shall review the signatures and certify the sufficiency of the petitions.

A ballot proposition authorizing an advancement shall be submitted to the town voters at the next special election date according to RCW 29A.04.330 if the county auditor certifies the petitions as having sufficient valid signatures. The town shall be advanced to a second-class city if the ballot proposition is approved by a simple majority vote, effective when the corporation is actually reorganized and the new officers are elected and qualified. The county auditor shall notify the secretary of state if the advancement of a town to a second-class city is approved.

\[ [2006 c 344 § 21](https://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/2005-06/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/Senate/6236.SL.pdf?cite=2006%20c%20344%20§%2021); [1994 c 81 § 8](https://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/1993-94/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/House/2244.SL.pdf?cite=1994%20c%2081%20§%208); [1965 c 7 § 35.06.070](https://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1965c7.pdf?cite=1965%20c%207%20§%2035.06.070); [1890 p 142 § 21](https://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1890pam21.pdf#page=142?cite=1890%20p%20142%20§%2021); RRS § 8942; \]

## 35.06.080 - Election of new officers.
The first election of officers of the new corporation after the advancement of classification is approved shall be at the next general municipal election and the officers of the old corporation, as altered by the election when the advancement was approved, shall remain in office until the officers of the new corporation are elected and qualified and assume office in accordance with RCW 29A.60.280. A primary shall be held where necessary to nominate candidates for the elected offices of the corporation as a second-class city. Candidates for city council positions shall run for specific council positions. The council of the old corporation may adopt a resolution providing that the offices of city attorney, clerk, and treasurer are appointive.

The three persons who are elected to council positions one through six receiving the greatest number of votes shall be elected to four-year terms of office and the other three persons who are elected to council positions one through six, and the person elected to council position seven, shall be elected to two-year terms of office. The person elected as mayor and the persons elected to any other elected office shall be elected to four-year terms of office. All successors to all elected positions, other than council position number seven, shall be elected to four-year terms of office and successors to council position number seven shall be elected to two-year terms of office.

There shall be no election of town offices at this election when the first officers of the new corporation are elected and the offices of the town shall expire when the officers of the new corporation assume office.

The ordinances, bylaws, and resolutions adopted by the old corporation shall, as far as consistent with the provisions of this title, continue in force until repealed by the council of the new corporation.

The council and officers of the town shall, upon demand, deliver to the proper officers of the new corporation all books of record, documents, and papers in their possession belonging to the old corporation.

\[ [2015 c 53 § 20](https://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/2015-16/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/House/1806-S.SL.pdf?cite=2015%20c%2053%20§%2020); [1994 c 81 § 9](https://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/1993-94/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/House/2244.SL.pdf?cite=1994%20c%2081%20§%209); [1965 c 106 § 1](https://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1965c106.pdf?cite=1965%20c%20106%20§%201); [1965 c 7 § 35.06.080](https://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1965c7.pdf?cite=1965%20c%207%20§%2035.06.080); [1890 p 143 § 22](https://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1890pam22.pdf#page=143?cite=1890%20p%20143%20§%2022); RRS § 8942; \]

