# 35.60 - World fairs or expositions—Participation by municipalities.
* [35.60.010 - "Municipality" defined.](#3560010---municipality-defined)
* [35.60.020 - Participation, exercise of powers declared public purpose and necessity.](#3560020---participation-exercise-of-powers-declared-public-purpose-and-necessity)
* [35.60.030 - Participation authorized—Powers—Costs.](#3560030---participation-authorizedpowerscosts)
* [35.60.040 - Bonds—Laws applicable to authorization and issuance.](#3560040---bondslaws-applicable-to-authorization-and-issuance)
* [35.60.050 - Authorization to appropriate funds and levy taxes.](#3560050---authorization-to-appropriate-funds-and-levy-taxes)
* [35.60.060 - Cooperation between municipalities—Use of facilities after conclusion of fair or exposition—Intergovernmental disposition of property.](#3560060---cooperation-between-municipalitiesuse-of-facilities-after-conclusion-of-fair-or-expositionintergovernmental-disposition-of-property)
* [35.60.070 - Chapter supplemental to other laws.](#3560070---chapter-supplemental-to-other-laws)
## 35.60.010 - "Municipality" defined.
"Municipality" as used in this chapter, means any political subdivision or municipal corporation of the state.

\[ [1965 c 7 § 35.60.010](https://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1965c7.pdf?cite=1965%20c%207%20§%2035.60.010); [1961 c 149 § 1](https://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1961c149.pdf?cite=1961%20c%20149%20§%201); prior:  1961 c 39 § 1; \]

## 35.60.020 - Participation, exercise of powers declared public purpose and necessity.
The participation of any municipality in any world fair or exposition, whether held within the boundaries of such municipality or within the boundaries of another municipality; the purchase, lease, or other acquisition of necessary lands therefor; the acquisition, lease, construction, improvements, maintenance, and equipping of buildings or other structures upon such lands or other lands; the operation and maintenance necessary for such participation, and the exercise of any other powers herein granted to such municipalities, are hereby declared to be public, governmental, county and municipal functions, exercised for a public purpose, and matters of public necessity, and such lands and other property acquired, constructed, improved, maintained, equipped, used, and disposed of by such municipalities in the manner and for the purposes enumerated in this chapter shall and are hereby declared to be acquired, constructed, improved, maintained, equipped, used, and disposed of for public, governmental, county, and municipal purposes and as a matter of public necessity.

\[ [1965 c 7 § 35.60.020](https://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1965c7.pdf?cite=1965%20c%207%20§%2035.60.020); [1961 c 149 § 2](https://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1961c149.pdf?cite=1961%20c%20149%20§%202); prior:  1961 c 39 § 2; \]

## 35.60.030 - Participation authorized—Powers—Costs.
Municipalities are authorized to participate in any world fair or exposition to be held within the state by the state or any political subdivision or municipal corporation thereof, whether held within the boundaries of such municipality or within the boundaries of another municipality. Any municipality so participating is authorized, through its governing authorities, to purchase, lease, or otherwise acquire property, real or personal; to construct, improve, maintain and equip buildings or other structures; and expend moneys for investigations, planning, operations, and maintenance necessary for such participation.

The cost of any such acquisition, construction, improvement, maintenance, equipping, investigations, planning, operation, or maintenance necessary for such participation may be paid for by appropriation of moneys available therefor, gifts, or wholly or partly from the proceeds of bonds of the municipality, as the governing authority of the municipality may determine.

\[ [1965 c 7 § 35.60.030](https://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1965c7.pdf?cite=1965%20c%207%20§%2035.60.030); [1961 c 149 § 3](https://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1961c149.pdf?cite=1961%20c%20149%20§%203); prior:  1961 c 39 § 3; \]

## 35.60.040 - Bonds—Laws applicable to authorization and issuance.
Any bonds to be issued by any municipality pursuant to the provisions of RCW 35.60.030, shall be authorized and issued in the manner and within the limitations prescribed by the Constitution and laws of this state or charter of the municipality for the issuance and authorization of bonds thereof for public purposes generally and secured by a general tax levy as provided by law. Such bonds shall be issued and sold in accordance with chapter 39.46 RCW.

\[ [1984 c 186 § 20](https://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1984c186.pdf?cite=1984%20c%20186%20§%2020); [1983 c 167 § 51](https://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1983c167.pdf?cite=1983%20c%20167%20§%2051); [1965 c 7 § 35.60.040](https://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1965c7.pdf?cite=1965%20c%207%20§%2035.60.040); [1961 c 149 § 4](https://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1961c149.pdf?cite=1961%20c%20149%20§%204); prior:  1961 c 39 § 4; \]

## 35.60.050 - Authorization to appropriate funds and levy taxes.
The governing bodies having power to appropriate moneys within such municipalities for the purpose of purchasing, leasing or otherwise acquiring property, constructing, improving, maintaining, and equipping buildings or other structures, and the investigations, planning, operation or maintenance necessary to participation in any such world fair or exposition, are hereby authorized to appropriate and cause to be raised by taxation or otherwise in such municipalities, moneys sufficient to carry out such purpose.

\[ [1965 c 7 § 35.60.050](https://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1965c7.pdf?cite=1965%20c%207%20§%2035.60.050); [1961 c 149 § 5](https://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1961c149.pdf?cite=1961%20c%20149%20§%205); prior:  1961 c 39 § 5; \]

## 35.60.060 - Cooperation between municipalities—Use of facilities after conclusion of fair or exposition—Intergovernmental disposition of property.
In any case where the participation of a municipality includes the construction of buildings or other structures on lands of another municipality, the governing authorities constructing such buildings or structures shall endeavor to cooperate with such other municipality for the construction and maintenance of such buildings or structures to a standard of health and safety common in the county where the world fair or exposition is being or will be held; and shall cooperate with such other municipality in any comprehensive plans it may promulgate for the general construction and maintenance of said world fair or exposition and utilization of the grounds and buildings or structures after the conclusion of such world fair or exposition to the end that a reasonable, economic use of said buildings or structures shall be returned for the life of said buildings or structures.

The governing authorities of any municipality are hereby authorized and empowered to sell, exchange, transfer, lease or otherwise dispose of any property, real or personal, acquired or constructed for the purpose of participation in such fair or exposition, in accordance with the provisions of RCW 39.33.010.

\[ [1965 c 7 § 35.60.060](https://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1965c7.pdf?cite=1965%20c%207%20§%2035.60.060); [1961 c 149 § 6](https://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1961c149.pdf?cite=1961%20c%20149%20§%206); prior:  1961 c 39 § 6; \]

## 35.60.070 - Chapter supplemental to other laws.
The powers and authority conferred upon municipalities under the provisions of this chapter, shall be construed as in addition and supplemental to powers or authority conferred by any other law, and nothing contained herein shall be construed as limiting any other powers or authority of such municipalities.

\[ [1965 c 7 § 35.60.070](https://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1965c7.pdf?cite=1965%20c%207%20§%2035.60.070); [1961 c 149 § 7](https://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1961c149.pdf?cite=1961%20c%20149%20§%207); prior:  1961 c 39 § 7; \]

