# 35.75 - Streets—Bicycles—Paths.
* [35.75.010 - Authority to regulate and license bicycles—Penalties.](#3575010---authority-to-regulate-and-license-bicyclespenalties)
* [35.75.020 - Use of bicycle paths for other purposes prohibited.](#3575020---use-of-bicycle-paths-for-other-purposes-prohibited)
* [35.75.030 - License fees authorized.](#3575030---license-fees-authorized)
* [35.75.040 - Rules regulating use of bicycle paths.](#3575040---rules-regulating-use-of-bicycle-paths)
* [35.75.050 - Bicycle road fund—Sources—Use.](#3575050---bicycle-road-fundsourcesuse)
* [35.75.060 - Use of street and road funds for bicycle paths, lanes, routes and improvements authorized—Standards.](#3575060---use-of-street-and-road-funds-for-bicycle-paths-lanes-routes-and-improvements-authorizedstandards)
## 35.75.010 - Authority to regulate and license bicycles—Penalties.
Every city and town may by ordinance regulate and license the riding of bicycles and other similar vehicles upon or along the streets, alleys, highways, or other public grounds within its limits and may construct and maintain bicycle paths or roadways within or outside of and beyond its limits leading to or from the city or town. The city or town may provide by ordinance for reasonable fines and penalties for violation of the ordinance.

\[ [1965 c 7 § 35.75.010](https://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1965c7.pdf?cite=1965%20c%207%20§%2035.75.010); [1899 c 31 § 1](https://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1899c31.pdf?cite=1899%20c%2031%20§%201); RRS § 9204.   1899 c 31 § 2; RRS § 9205; \]

## 35.75.020 - Use of bicycle paths for other purposes prohibited.
It shall be unlawful for any person to lead, drive, ride, or propel any team, wagon, animal, or vehicle other than a bicycle, electric personal assistive mobility device, or similar vehicle upon and along any bicycle path constructed within or without the corporate limits of any city or town excepting at suitable crossings to be provided in the construction of such paths. Any person violating the provisions of this section shall be guilty of a misdemeanor.

\[ [2002 c 247 § 8](https://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/2001-02/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/Senate/6316.SL.pdf?cite=2002%20c%20247%20§%208); [1965 c 7 § 35.75.020](https://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1965c7.pdf?cite=1965%20c%207%20§%2035.75.020); [1899 c 31 § 3](https://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1899c31.pdf?cite=1899%20c%2031%20§%203); RRS § 9206; \]

## 35.75.030 - License fees authorized.
Every city and town by ordinance may establish and collect reasonable license fees from all persons riding a bicycle or other similar vehicle within its respective corporate limits, and may enforce the payment thereof by reasonable fines and penalties.

\[ [1965 c 7 § 35.75.030](https://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1965c7.pdf?cite=1965%20c%207%20§%2035.75.030); [1899 c 31 § 4](https://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1899c31.pdf?cite=1899%20c%2031%20§%204); RRS § 9207; \]

## 35.75.040 - Rules regulating use of bicycle paths.
The license fee to be paid and the rules regulating the riding of bicycles or other similar vehicles within any city or town shall be fixed by ordinance, and the rules regulating the use of such bicycle paths or roadways constructed or maintained within its limits and the fines and penalties for the violation of such rules shall be fixed by ordinance.

\[ [1965 c 7 § 35.75.040](https://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1965c7.pdf?cite=1965%20c%207%20§%2035.75.040); [1899 c 31 § 5](https://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1899c31.pdf?cite=1899%20c%2031%20§%205); RRS § 9208; \]

## 35.75.050 - Bicycle road fund—Sources—Use.
The city or town council shall by ordinance provide that the whole amount or any amount not less than seventy-five percent of all license fees, penalties or other moneys collected under the authority of this chapter shall be paid into and placed to the credit of a special fund to be known as the "bicycle road fund." The moneys in the bicycle road fund shall not be transferred to any other fund and shall be paid out for the sole purpose of building and maintaining bicycle paths and roadways authorized to be constructed and maintained by this chapter or for special police officers, bicycle tags, stationery and other expenses growing out of the regulating and licensing of the riding of bicycles and other vehicles and the construction, maintenance and regulation of the use of bicycle paths and roadways.

\[ [2007 c 218 § 69](https://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/2007-08/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/Senate/5063.SL.pdf?cite=2007%20c%20218%20§%2069); [1965 c 7 § 35.75.050](https://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1965c7.pdf?cite=1965%20c%207%20§%2035.75.050); [1899 c 31 § 6](https://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1899c31.pdf?cite=1899%20c%2031%20§%206); RRS § 9209; \]

## 35.75.060 - Use of street and road funds for bicycle paths, lanes, routes and improvements authorized—Standards.
Any city or town may use any funds available for street or road construction, maintenance, or improvement for building, improving, and maintaining bicycle paths, lanes, roadways, and routes, and for improvements to make existing streets and roads more suitable and safe for bicycle traffic: PROVIDED, That any such paths, lanes, roadways, routes, or streets for which any such street or road funds are expended shall be suitable for bicycle transportation purposes and not solely for recreation purposes. Bicycle facilities constructed or modified after December 31, 2012, shall meet or exceed the standards adopted by the design standards committee under RCW 35.78.030.

\[ [2012 c 67 § 2](https://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/2011-12/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/House/1700-S.SL.pdf?cite=2012%20c%2067%20§%202); [1982 c 55 § 1](https://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1982c55.pdf?cite=1982%20c%2055%20§%201); [1974 ex.s. c 141 § 10](https://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1974ex1c141.pdf?cite=1974%20ex.s.%20c%20141%20§%2010); \]

