# 71A.16 - Eligibility for services.
* [71A.16.010 - Referral for services—Admittance to residential habilitation centers—Expiration of subsections.](#71a16010---referral-for-servicesadmittance-to-residential-habilitation-centersexpiration-of-subsections)
* [71A.16.020 - Eligibility for services—Rules.](#71a16020---eligibility-for-servicesrules)
* [71A.16.030 - Outreach program—Determination of eligibility for services—Application. (Effective until January 1, 2022.)](#71a16030---outreach-programdetermination-of-eligibility-for-servicesapplication-effective-until-january-1-2022)
* [71A.16.040 - Determination of eligibility—Notice—Rules for redetermination.](#71a16040---determination-of-eligibilitynoticerules-for-redetermination)
* [71A.16.050 - Determination of eligibility—Assessment—Determination of appropriate services—Availability of services.](#71a16050---determination-of-eligibilityassessmentdetermination-of-appropriate-servicesavailability-of-services)
## 71A.16.010 - Referral for services—Admittance to residential habilitation centers—Expiration of subsections.
1. It is the intention of the legislature in this chapter to establish a single point of referral for persons with developmental disabilities and their families so that they may have a place of entry and continuing contact for services authorized under this title to persons with developmental disabilities. Eligible persons with developmental disabilities, whether they live in the community or residential habilitation centers, should have the opportunity to choose where they live.

2. Until June 30, 2003, and subject to subsection (3) of this section, if there is a vacancy in a residential habilitation center, the department shall offer admittance to the center to any eligible adult, or eligible adolescent on an exceptional case-by-case basis, with developmental disabilities if his or her assessed needs require the funded level of resources that are provided by the center.

3. The department shall not offer a person admittance to a residential habilitation center under subsection (2) of this section unless the department also offers the person appropriate community support services listed in RCW 71A.12.040.

4. Community support services offered under subsection (3) of this section may only be offered using funds specifically designated for this purpose in the state operating budget. When these funds are exhausted, the department may not offer admittance to a residential habilitation center, or community support services under this section.

5. Nothing in this section shall be construed to create an entitlement to state services for persons with developmental disabilities.

6. Subsections (2) through (6) of this section expire June 30, 2003.

\[ [1998 c 216 § 3](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/1997-98/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/Senate/6751-S.SL.pdf?cite=1998%20c%20216%20§%203); [1988 c 176 § 401](http://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1988c176.pdf?cite=1988%20c%20176%20§%20401); \]

## 71A.16.020 - Eligibility for services—Rules.
1. A person is eligible for services under this title if the secretary finds that the person has a developmental disability as defined in *RCW 71A.10.020(2).

2. The secretary may adopt rules further defining and implementing the criteria in the definition of "developmental disability" under *RCW 71A.10.020(2).

\[ [1988 c 176 § 402](http://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1988c176.pdf?cite=1988%20c%20176%20§%20402); \]

## 71A.16.030 - Outreach program—Determination of eligibility for services—Application. (Effective until January 1, 2022.)
1. The department will develop an outreach program to ensure that any eligible person with developmental disabilities services in homes, the community, and residential habilitation centers will be made aware of these services. This subsection (1) expires June 30, 2003.

2. The secretary shall establish a single procedure for persons to apply for a determination of eligibility for services provided to persons with developmental disabilities.

3. Until June 30, 2003, the procedure set out under subsection (1) of this section must require that all applicants and all persons with developmental disabilities currently receiving services from the division of developmental disabilities within the department be given notice of the existence and availability of residential habilitation center and community support services. For genuine choice to exist, people must know what the options are. Available options must be clearly explained, with services customized to fit the unique needs and circumstances of developmentally disabled clients and their families. Choice of providers and design of services and supports will be determined by the individual in conjunction with the department. When the person cannot make these choices, the person's legal guardian may make them, consistent with *chapter 11.88 or 11.92 RCW. This subsection expires June 30, 2003.

4. An application may be submitted by a person with a developmental disability, by the legal representative of a person with a developmental disability, or by any other person who is authorized by rule of the secretary to submit an application.

\[ [1998 c 216 § 4](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/1997-98/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/Senate/6751-S.SL.pdf?cite=1998%20c%20216%20§%204); [1988 c 176 § 403](http://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1988c176.pdf?cite=1988%20c%20176%20§%20403); \]

## 71A.16.040 - Determination of eligibility—Notice—Rules for redetermination.
1. On receipt of an application for services submitted under RCW 71A.16.030, the secretary in a timely manner shall make a written determination as to whether the applicant is eligible for services provided under this title for persons with developmental disabilities.

2. The secretary shall give notice of the secretary's determination on eligibility to the person who submitted the application and to the applicant, if the applicant is a person other than the person who submitted the application for services. The notice shall also include a statement advising the recipient of the right to an adjudicative proceeding under RCW 71A.10.050 and the right to judicial review of the secretary's final decision.

3. The secretary may establish rules for redetermination of eligibility for services under this title.

\[ [1989 c 175 § 141](http://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1989c175.pdf?cite=1989%20c%20175%20§%20141); [1988 c 176 § 404](http://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1988c176.pdf?cite=1988%20c%20176%20§%20404); \]

## 71A.16.050 - Determination of eligibility—Assessment—Determination of appropriate services—Availability of services.
The determination made under this chapter is only as to whether a person is eligible for services. After the secretary has determined under this chapter that a person is eligible for services, the individual may request an assessment for eligibility for medicaid programs and specific services administered by the developmental disabilities administration. The secretary shall make a determination as to what services are appropriate for the person. The secretary shall prioritize services to medicaid eligible clients. Services may be made available to nonmedicaid eligible clients based on available funding. Services available through the state medicaid plan must be provided to those individuals who meet the eligibility criteria. The department shall establish and maintain a service request list database for individuals who are found to be eligible and have an assessed and unmet need for programs and services offered under a home and community-based services waiver, but the provision of a specific service would exceed the biennially budgeted capacity.

\[ [2014 c 139 § 3](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/2013-14/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/Senate/6387-S.SL.pdf?cite=2014%20c%20139%20§%203); [1988 c 176 § 405](http://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1988c176.pdf?cite=1988%20c%20176%20§%20405); \]

