# 71A.22 - Training centers and homes.
* [71A.22.010 - Contracts for services authorized.](#71a22010---contracts-for-services-authorized)
* [71A.22.020 - Definitions.](#71a22020---definitions)
* [71A.22.030 - Payments by secretary under this chapter supplemental—Limitation.](#71a22030---payments-by-secretary-under-this-chapter-supplementallimitation)
* [71A.22.040 - Certification of facility as day training center or group training home.](#71a22040---certification-of-facility-as-day-training-center-or-group-training-home)
* [71A.22.050 - Services in day training center or group training home—Application for payment.](#71a22050---services-in-day-training-center-or-group-training-homeapplication-for-payment)
* [71A.22.060 - Facilities to be nonsectarian.](#71a22060---facilities-to-be-nonsectarian)
## 71A.22.010 - Contracts for services authorized.
The secretary may enter into agreements with any person or with any person, corporation, or association operating a day training center or group training home or a combination day training center and group training home approved by the department, for the payment of all, or a portion, of the cost of the care, treatment, maintenance, support, and training of persons with developmental disabilities.

\[ [1988 c 176 § 801](http://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1988c176.pdf?cite=1988%20c%20176%20§%20801); \]

## 71A.22.020 - Definitions.
As used in this chapter:

1. "Day training center" means a facility equipped, supervised, managed, and operated at least three days per week by any person, association, or corporation on a nonprofit basis for the day-care, treatment, training, and maintenance of persons with developmental disabilities, and approved under this chapter and the standards under rules adopted by the secretary.

2. "Group training home" means a facility equipped, supervised, managed, and operated on a full-time basis by any person, association, or corporation on a nonprofit basis for the full-time care, treatment, training, and maintenance of persons with developmental disabilities, and approved under this chapter and the standards under the rules adopted by the secretary.

\[ [1988 c 176 § 802](http://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1988c176.pdf?cite=1988%20c%20176%20§%20802); \]

## 71A.22.030 - Payments by secretary under this chapter supplemental—Limitation.
All payments made by the secretary under this chapter, shall be, insofar as possible, supplementary to payments to be made to a day training center or group training home, or a combination of both, by the persons with developmental disabilities resident in the home or center. Payments made by the secretary under this chapter shall not exceed actual costs for the care, treatment, support, maintenance, and training of any person with a developmental disability whether at a day training center or group training home or combination of both.

\[ [1988 c 176 § 803](http://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1988c176.pdf?cite=1988%20c%20176%20§%20803); \]

## 71A.22.040 - Certification of facility as day training center or group training home.
Any person, corporation, or association may apply to the secretary for approval and certification of the applicant's facility as a day training center or a group training home for persons with developmental disabilities, or a combination of both. The secretary may either grant or deny certification or revoke certification previously granted after investigation of the applicant's facilities, to ascertain whether or not such facilities are adequate for the care, treatment, maintenance, training, and support of persons with developmental disabilities, under standards in rules adopted by the secretary. Day training centers and group training homes must meet local health and safety standards as may be required by local health and fire-safety authorities.

\[ [1989 c 329 § 2](http://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1989c329.pdf?cite=1989%20c%20329%20§%202); [1988 c 176 § 804](http://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1988c176.pdf?cite=1988%20c%20176%20§%20804); \]

## 71A.22.050 - Services in day training center or group training home—Application for payment.
1. Except as otherwise provided in this section, the provisions of this title govern applications for payment by the state for services in a day training center or group training home approved by the secretary under this chapter.

2. In determining eligibility and the amount of payment, the secretary shall make special provision for group training homes where parents are actively involved as a member of the administrative board of the group training home and who may provide for some of the services required by a resident therein. The special provisions shall include establishing eligibility requirements for a person placed in such a group training home to have a parent able and willing to attend administrative board meetings and participate insofar as possible in carrying out special activities deemed by the board to contribute to the well being of the residents.

3. If the secretary determines that a person is eligible for services in a day training center or group training home, the secretary shall determine the extent and type of services to be provided and the amount that the department will pay, based upon the needs of the person and the ability of the parent or the guardian to pay or contribute to the payment of the monthly cost of the services.

4. The secretary may, upon application of the person who is receiving services or the person's legal representative, after investigation of the ability or inability of such persons to pay, or without application being made, modify the amount of the monthly payments to be paid by the secretary for services at a day training center or group training home or combination of both.

\[ [1988 c 176 § 805](http://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1988c176.pdf?cite=1988%20c%20176%20§%20805); \]

## 71A.22.060 - Facilities to be nonsectarian.
A day training center and a group training home under this chapter shall be a nonsectarian training center and a nonsectarian group training home.

\[ [1988 c 176 § 806](http://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1988c176.pdf?cite=1988%20c%20176%20§%20806); \]

