# 71A.18 - Service delivery.
* [71A.18.010 - Individual service plans.](#71a18010---individual-service-plans)
* [71A.18.020 - Services provided if funds available.](#71a18020---services-provided-if-funds-available)
* [71A.18.030 - Rejection of service.](#71a18030---rejection-of-service)
* [71A.18.040 - Alternative service—Application—Determination—Reauthorization—Notice.](#71a18040---alternative-serviceapplicationdeterminationreauthorizationnotice)
* [71A.18.050 - Discontinuance of a service.](#71a18050---discontinuance-of-a-service)
## 71A.18.010 - Individual service plans.
The secretary may produce and maintain an individual service plan for each eligible person. An individual service plan is a plan that identifies the needs of a person for services and determines what services will be in the best interests of the person and will meet the person's needs.

\[ [1988 c 176 § 501](https://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1988c176.pdf?cite=1988%20c%20176%20§%20501); \]

## 71A.18.020 - Services provided if funds available.
The secretary may provide a service to a person eligible under this title if funds are available. If there is an individual service plan, the secretary shall consider the need for services as provided in that plan.

\[ [1988 c 176 § 601](https://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1988c176.pdf?cite=1988%20c%20176%20§%20601); \]

## 71A.18.030 - Rejection of service.
An eligible person or the person's legal representative may reject an authorized service. Rejection of an authorized service shall not affect the person's eligibility for services and shall not eliminate the person from consideration for other services or for the same service at a different time or under different circumstances.

\[ [1988 c 176 § 602](https://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1988c176.pdf?cite=1988%20c%20176%20§%20602); \]

## 71A.18.040 - Alternative service—Application—Determination—Reauthorization—Notice.
1. A person who is receiving a service under this title or the person's legal representative may request the secretary to authorize a service that is available under this title in place of a service that the person is presently receiving.

2. The secretary upon receiving a request for change of service shall consult in the manner provided in RCW 71A.10.070 and within ninety days shall determine whether the following criteria are met:

   a. The alternative plan proposes a less dependent program than the person is participating in under current service;

   b. The alternative service is appropriate under the goals and objectives of the person's individual service plan;

   c. The alternative service is not in violation of applicable state and federal law; and

   d. The service can reasonably be made available.

3. If the requested alternative service meets all of the criteria of subsection (2) of this section, the service shall be authorized as soon as reasonable, but not later than one hundred twenty days after completion of the determination process, unless the secretary determines that:

   a. The alternative plan is more costly than the current plan;

   b. Current appropriations are not sufficient to implement the alternative service without reducing services to existing clients; or

   c. Providing alternative service would take precedence over other priorities for delivery of service.

4. The secretary shall give notice as provided in RCW 71A.10.060 of the grant of a request for a change of service. The secretary shall give notice as provided in RCW 71A.10.060 of denial of a request for change of service and of the right to an adjudicative proceeding.

5. [Empty]

   a. When the secretary has changed service from a residential habilitation center to a setting other than a residential habilitation center, the secretary shall reauthorize service at the residential habilitation center if the secretary in reevaluating the needs of the person finds that the person needs service in a residential habilitation center.

   b. A person who has moved from a residential habilitation center that has closed to a community-based setting shall be offered a right to return to a residential habilitation center during the first year following their move to the community.

6. If the secretary determines that current appropriations are sufficient to deliver additional services without reducing services to persons who are presently receiving services, the secretary is authorized to give persons notice under RCW 71A.10.060 that they may request the services as new services or as changes of services under this section.

\[ [2011 1st sp.s. c 30 § 9](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/2011-12/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/Senate/5459-S2.SL.pdf?cite=2011%201st%20sp.s.%20c%2030%20§%209); [1989 c 175 § 142](https://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1989c175.pdf?cite=1989%20c%20175%20§%20142); [1988 c 176 § 603](https://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1988c176.pdf?cite=1988%20c%20176%20§%20603); \]

## 71A.18.050 - Discontinuance of a service.
1. When considering the discontinuance of a service that is being provided to a person, the secretary shall consult as required in RCW 71A.10.070.

2. The discontinuance of a service under this section does not affect the person's eligibility for services. Other services may be provided or the same service may be restored when it is again available or when it is again needed.

3. Except when the service is discontinued at the request of the person receiving the service or that person's legal representative, the secretary shall give notice as required in RCW 71A.10.060.

\[ [1988 c 176 § 604](https://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1988c176.pdf?cite=1988%20c%20176%20§%20604); \]

