# 44.39 - Joint committee on energy supply and energy conservation.
* [44.39.010 - Committee created.](#4439010---committee-created)
* [44.39.012 - Definitions.](#4439012---definitions)
* [44.39.015 - Composition—Appointment of members.](#4439015---compositionappointment-of-members)
* [44.39.020 - Terms.](#4439020---terms)
* [44.39.025 - Vacancies.](#4439025---vacancies)
* [44.39.038 - Study of state building code relating to energy.](#4439038---study-of-state-building-code-relating-to-energy)
* [44.39.045 - Expenses and per diem.](#4439045---expenses-and-per-diem)
* [44.39.050 - Payment of expenses—Vouchers.](#4439050---payment-of-expensesvouchers)
* [44.39.060 - Examinations—Subpoenas—Depositions—Contempt proceedings—Witness fees.](#4439060---examinationssubpoenasdepositionscontempt-proceedingswitness-fees)
* [44.39.070 - Meetings—Energy supply alert or energy emergency—Duties.](#4439070---meetingsenergy-supply-alert-or-energy-emergencyduties)
## 44.39.010 - Committee created.
There is hereby created the joint committee on energy supply and energy conservation.

\[ [2005 c 299 § 1](https://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/2005-06/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/House/1895-S.SL.pdf?cite=2005%20c%20299%20§%201); [2001 c 214 § 30](https://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/2001-02/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/House/2247.SL.pdf?cite=2001%20c%20214%20§%2030); [1977 ex.s. c 328 § 13](https://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1977ex1c328.pdf?cite=1977%20ex.s.%20c%20328%20§%2013); [1969 ex.s. c 260 § 1](https://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1969ex1c260.pdf?cite=1969%20ex.s.%20c%20260%20§%201); \]

## 44.39.012 - Definitions.
The definitions in this section apply throughout this chapter unless the context clearly requires otherwise.

1. "Committee" means the joint committee on energy supply and energy conservation.

2. "Conservation" means reduced energy consumption or energy cost, or increased efficiency in the use of energy, and activities, measures, or equipment designed to achieve such results.

\[ [2005 c 299 § 4](https://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/2005-06/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/House/1895-S.SL.pdf?cite=2005%20c%20299%20§%204); \]

## 44.39.015 - Composition—Appointment of members.
The committee shall consist of four senators and four representatives who shall be selected biennially as follows:

1. The president of the senate shall appoint four members from the senate to serve on the committee, including the chair of the committee responsible for energy issues. Two members from each major political party must be appointed.

2. The speaker or co-speakers of the house of representatives shall appoint four members from the house of representatives to serve on the committee, including the chair or co-chairs of the committee responsible for energy issues. Two members from each major political party must be appointed.

3. The committee shall elect a chair and a vice chair. The chair shall be a member of the house of representatives in even-numbered years and a member of the senate in odd-numbered years. In the case of a tie in the membership of the house of representatives in an even-numbered year, the committee shall elect co-chairs from the house of representatives in that year.

\[ [2001 c 214 § 31](https://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/2001-02/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/House/2247.SL.pdf?cite=2001%20c%20214%20§%2031); [1977 ex.s. c 328 § 14](https://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1977ex1c328.pdf?cite=1977%20ex.s.%20c%20328%20§%2014); [1969 ex.s. c 260 § 2](https://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1969ex1c260.pdf?cite=1969%20ex.s.%20c%20260%20§%202); \]

## 44.39.020 - Terms.
Members shall serve until their successors are installed as provided in RCW 44.39.015, as now or hereafter amended, at the next succeeding regular session of the legislature during an odd-numbered year, or until they are no longer members of the legislature, whichever is sooner.

\[ [1980 c 87 § 38](https://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1980c87.pdf?cite=1980%20c%2087%20§%2038); [1977 ex.s. c 328 § 15](https://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1977ex1c328.pdf?cite=1977%20ex.s.%20c%20328%20§%2015); [1969 ex.s. c 260 § 3](https://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1969ex1c260.pdf?cite=1969%20ex.s.%20c%20260%20§%203); \]

## 44.39.025 - Vacancies.
The presiding officer of the appropriate legislative chamber shall fill any vacancies occurring on the committee by appointment from the same political party as the departing member. Notwithstanding the provisions of RCW 44.39.015 as now or hereafter amended, any such appointee shall be deemed installed as a member upon appointment. Members filling vacancies shall serve until they or their successors are installed as provided in RCW 44.39.015, as now or hereafter amended, or until they are no longer members of the legislature, whichever is sooner.

\[ [1977 ex.s. c 328 § 16](https://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1977ex1c328.pdf?cite=1977%20ex.s.%20c%20328%20§%2016); [1969 ex.s. c 260 § 4](https://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1969ex1c260.pdf?cite=1969%20ex.s.%20c%20260%20§%204); \]

## 44.39.038 - Study of state building code relating to energy.
The senate and house committees on energy and utilities shall make continuing studies of the state building code as it relates to energy consumption, conservation and retention and shall submit their recommendations concerning such to the legislature periodically.

\[ [1977 ex.s. c 14 § 13](https://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1977ex1c14.pdf?cite=1977%20ex.s.%20c%2014%20§%2013); \]

## 44.39.045 - Expenses and per diem.
The members of the committee shall serve without compensation, but shall be reimbursed for their expenses incurred while attending sessions of the committee or any subcommittee of the committee, or while engaged in other committee business authorized by the committee, as provided for in RCW 44.04.120.

\[ [1969 ex.s. c 260 § 8](https://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1969ex1c260.pdf?cite=1969%20ex.s.%20c%20260%20§%208); \]

## 44.39.050 - Payment of expenses—Vouchers.
All expenses incurred by the committee, including salaries and expenses of employees, shall be paid upon voucher forms as provided by the director of financial management and signed by the chair of the committee. Vouchers may be drawn upon funds appropriated generally by the legislature for legislative expenses or upon any special appropriation which may be provided by the legislature for the expenses of the committee.

\[ [2009 c 549 § 6015](https://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/2009-10/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/Senate/5038.SL.pdf?cite=2009%20c%20549%20§%206015); [1979 c 151 § 156](https://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1979c151.pdf?cite=1979%20c%20151%20§%20156); [1969 ex.s. c 260 § 9](https://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1969ex1c260.pdf?cite=1969%20ex.s.%20c%20260%20§%209); \]

## 44.39.060 - Examinations—Subpoenas—Depositions—Contempt proceedings—Witness fees.
In the discharge of any duty imposed by this chapter, the committee or any personnel acting under its direction shall have the authority to examine and inspect all properties, equipment, facilities, files, records, and accounts of any state office, department, institution, board, committee, commission, or agency; to administer oaths; and to issue subpoenas, upon approval of a majority of the members of the house or senate rules committee, to compel the attendance of witnesses and the production of any papers, books, accounts, documents, and testimony, and to cause the deposition of witnesses, either residing within or without the state, to be taken in the manner prescribed by law for taking depositions in civil actions in the superior courts.

In case of the failure of any person to comply with any subpoena issued in behalf of the committee, or on the refusal of any witness to testify to any matters regarding which he or she may be lawfully interrogated, it shall be the duty of the superior court of any county, or of the judge thereof, on application of the committee, to compel obedience by proceedings for contempt, as in the case of disobedience of the requirements of a subpoena issued from such court or a refusal to testify therein.

Each witness who appears before the committee by its order, other than a state official or employee, shall receive for his or her attendance the fees and mileage provided for witnesses in civil cases in courts of record, which shall be audited and paid upon the presentation of proper vouchers signed by such witness and approved by the chair of the committee.

\[ [2010 c 8 § 8001](https://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/2009-10/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/Senate/6239-S.SL.pdf?cite=2010%20c%208%20§%208001); [2009 c 549 § 6016](https://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/2009-10/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/Senate/5038.SL.pdf?cite=2009%20c%20549%20§%206016); [1977 ex.s. c 328 § 17](https://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1977ex1c328.pdf?cite=1977%20ex.s.%20c%20328%20§%2017); \]

## 44.39.070 - Meetings—Energy supply alert or energy emergency—Duties.
1. The committee shall meet and function at the following times: (a) At least once per year or at anytime upon the call of the chair to receive information related to the state or regional energy supply situation; (b) during a condition of energy supply alert or energy emergency; and (c) upon the call of the chair, in response to gubernatorial action to terminate such a condition. Upon the declaration by the governor of a condition of energy supply alert or energy emergency, the committee shall meet to receive any plans proposed by the governor for programs, controls, standards, and priorities for the production, allocation, and consumption of energy during any current or anticipated condition of energy supply alert or energy emergency, any proposed plans for the suspension or modification of existing rules of the Washington Administrative Code, and any other relevant matters the governor deems desirable. The committee shall review such plans and matters and shall transmit its recommendations to the governor for review. The committee may review any voluntary programs or local or regional programs for the production, allocation, or consumption of energy which have been submitted to the committee.

2. The committee shall receive any request from the governor for the approval of a declaration of a condition of energy emergency as provided in RCW 43.21G.040 as now or hereafter amended and shall either approve or disapprove such request.

3. During a condition of energy supply alert, the committee shall: (a) Receive any request from the governor for an extension of the condition of energy supply alert for an additional period of time not to exceed ninety consecutive days and the findings upon which such request is based; (b) receive any request from the governor for subsequent extensions of the condition of energy supply alert for an additional period of time not to exceed one hundred twenty consecutive days and the findings upon which such a request is based; and (c) either approve or disapprove the requested extensions. When approving a request, the committee may specify a longer period than requested, up to ninety days for initial extensions and one hundred twenty days for additional extensions.

4. During a condition of energy emergency the committee shall: (a) Receive any request from the governor for an extension of the condition of energy emergency for an additional period of time not to exceed forty-five consecutive days and the finding upon which any such request is based; (b) receive any request from the governor for subsequent extensions of the condition of energy emergency for an additional period of time not to exceed sixty consecutive days and the findings upon which such a request is based; and (c) either approve or disapprove the requested extensions. When approving a request, the committee may specify a longer period than requested, up to forty-five days for initial extensions and sixty days for additional extensions.

\[ [2005 c 299 § 2](https://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/2005-06/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/House/1895-S.SL.pdf?cite=2005%20c%20299%20§%202); [2002 c 192 § 1](https://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/2001-02/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/House/2441-S.SL.pdf?cite=2002%20c%20192%20§%201); [1977 ex.s. c 328 § 18](https://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1977ex1c328.pdf?cite=1977%20ex.s.%20c%20328%20§%2018); \]

