# Engrossed Second Substitute House Bill 1477 as Recommended by Appropriations - as passed by the Legislature

[Source](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/2021-22/Xml/Bills/House%20Passed%20Legislature/1477-S2.PL.xml)
## Section 101
(1) The legislature finds that:
(a) Nearly 6,000 Washington adults and children died by suicide in the last five years, according to the federal centers for disease control and prevention, tragically reflecting a state increase of 36 percent in the last 10 years.
(b) Suicide is now the single leading cause of death for Washington young people ages 10 through 24, with total deaths 22 percent higher than for vehicle crashes.
(c) Groups with suicide rates higher than the general population include veterans, American Indians/Alaska Natives, LGBTQ youth, and people living in rural counties across the state.
(d) More than one in five Washington residents are currently living with a behavioral health disorder.
(e) The COVID-19 pandemic has increased stressors and substance use among Washington residents.
(f) An improved crisis response system will reduce reliance on emergency room services and the use of law enforcement response to behavioral health crises and will stabilize individuals in the community whenever possible.
(g) To accomplish effective crisis response and suicide prevention, Washington state must continue its integrated approach to address mental health and substance use disorder in tandem under the umbrella of behavioral health disorders, consistently with chapter 71.24 RCW and the state's approach to integrated health care. This is particularly true in the domain of suicide prevention, because of the prevalence of substance use as both a risk factor and means for suicide.
(2) The legislature intends to:
(a) Establish crisis call center hubs and expand the crisis response system in a deliberate, phased approach that includes the involvement of partners from a range of perspectives to:
(i) Save lives by improving the quality of and access to behavioral health crisis services;
(ii) Further equity in addressing mental health and substance use treatment and assure a culturally and linguistically competent response to behavioral health crises;
(iii) Recognize that, historically, crisis response placed marginalized communities, including those experiencing behavioral health crises, at disproportionate risk of poor outcomes and criminal justice involvement;
(iv) Comply with the national suicide hotline designation act of 2020 and the federal communications commission's rules adopted July 16, 2020, to assure that all Washington residents receive a consistent and effective level of 988 suicide prevention and other behavioral health crisis response and suicide prevention services no matter where they live, work, or travel in the state; and
(v) Provide higher quality support for people experiencing behavioral health crises through investment in new technology to create a crisis call center hub system to triage calls and link individuals to follow-up care.
(b) Make additional investments to enhance the crisis response system, including the expansion of crisis teams, to be known as mobile rapid response crisis teams, and deployment of a wide array of crisis stabilization services, such as 23-hour crisis stabilization units based on the living room model, crisis stabilization centers, short-term respite facilities, peer-run respite centers, and same-day walk-in behavioral health services. The overall crisis system shall contain components that operate like hospital emergency departments that accept all walk-ins and ambulance, fire, and police drop-offs. Certified peer counselors as well as peers in other roles providing support must be incorporated within the crisis system and along the continuum of crisis care.

## Section 201
(1) The definitions in this section apply throughout this chapter unless the context clearly requires otherwise.
(a) "988 crisis hotline" has the same meaning as in RCW 71.24.025.
(b) "Crisis call center hub" has the same meaning as in RCW 71.24.025.
(2) The definitions in RCW 82.14B.020 apply to this chapter.

## Section 202
(1)(a) A statewide 988 behavioral health crisis response and suicide prevention line tax is imposed on the use of all radio access lines:
(i) By subscribers whose place of primary use is located within the state in the amount set forth in (a)(ii) of this subsection (1) per month for each radio access line. The tax must be uniform for each radio access line under this subsection (1); and
(ii) By consumers whose retail transaction occurs within the state in the amount set forth in this subsection (1)(a)(ii) per retail transaction. The amount of tax must be uniform for each retail transaction under this subsection (1) and is as follows:
(A) Beginning October 1, 2021, through December 31, 2022, the tax rate is 24 cents for each radio access line; and
(B) Beginning January 1, 2023, the tax rate is 40 cents for each radio access line.
(b) The tax imposed under this subsection (1) must be remitted to the department by radio communications service companies, including those companies that resell radio access lines, and sellers of prepaid wireless telecommunications service, on a tax return provided by the department. Tax proceeds must be deposited by the treasurer into the statewide 988 behavioral health crisis response and suicide prevention line account created in section 205 of this act.
(c) For the purposes of this subsection (1), the retail transaction is deemed to occur at the location where the transaction is sourced under RCW 82.32.520(3)(c).
(2) A statewide 988 behavioral health crisis response and suicide prevention line tax is imposed on all interconnected voice over internet protocol service lines in the state. The amount of tax must be uniform for each line and must be levied on no more than the number of voice over internet protocol service lines on an account that is capable of simultaneous unrestricted outward calling to the public switched telephone network. The tax imposed under this subsection (2) must be remitted to the department by interconnected voice over internet protocol service companies on a tax return provided by the department. The amount of tax for each interconnected voice over internet protocol service line whose place of primary use is located in the state is as follows:
(a) Beginning October 1, 2021, through December 31, 2022, the tax rate is 24 cents for an interconnected voice over internet protocol service line; and
(b) Beginning January 1, 2023, the tax rate is 40 cents for an interconnected voice over internet protocol service line.
(3) A statewide 988 behavioral health crisis response and suicide prevention line tax is imposed on all switched access lines in the state. The amount of tax must be uniform for each line and must be levied on no more than the number of switched access lines on an account that is capable of simultaneous unrestricted outward calling to the public switched telephone network. The tax imposed under this subsection (3) must be remitted to the department by local exchange companies on a tax return provided by the department. The amount of tax for each switched access line whose place of primary use is located in the state is as follows:
(a) Beginning October 1, 2021, through December 31, 2022, the tax rate is 24 cents for each switched access line; and
(b) Beginning January 1, 2023, the tax rate is 40 cents for each switched access line.
(4) Tax proceeds collected pursuant to this section must be deposited by the treasurer into the statewide 988 behavioral health crisis response and suicide prevention line account created in section 205 of this act.

## Section 203
(1) Except as provided otherwise in subsection (2) of this section:
(a) The statewide 988 behavioral health crisis response and suicide prevention line tax on radio access lines must be collected from the subscriber by the radio communications service company, including those companies that resell radio access lines, providing the radio access line to the subscriber, and the seller of prepaid wireless telecommunications services.
(b) The statewide 988 behavioral health crisis response and suicide prevention line tax on interconnected voice over internet protocol service lines must be collected from the subscriber by the interconnected voice over internet protocol service company providing the interconnected voice over internet protocol service line to the subscriber.
(c) The statewide 988 behavioral health crisis response and suicide prevention line tax on switched access lines must be collected from the subscriber by the local exchange company.
(d) The amount of the tax must be stated separately on the billing statement which is sent to the subscriber.
(2)(a) The statewide 988 behavioral health crisis response and suicide prevention line tax imposed by this chapter must be collected from the consumer by the seller of a prepaid wireless telecommunications service for each retail transaction occurring in this state.
(b) The department must transfer all tax proceeds remitted by a seller under this subsection (2) to the statewide 988 behavioral health crisis response and suicide prevention line account created in section 205 of this act.
(c) The taxes required by this subsection to be collected by the seller must be separately stated in any sales invoice or instrument of sale provided to the consumer.

## Section 204
(1)(a) The statewide 988 behavioral health crisis response and suicide prevention line tax imposed by this chapter must be paid by the subscriber to the radio communications service company providing the radio access line, the local exchange company, or the interconnected voice over internet protocol service company providing the interconnected voice over internet protocol service line.
(b) Each radio communications service company, each local exchange company, and each interconnected voice over internet protocol service company, must collect from the subscriber the full amount of the taxes payable. The statewide 988 behavioral health crisis response and suicide prevention line tax required by this chapter to be collected by a company or seller, are deemed to be held in trust by the company or seller until paid to the department. Any radio communications service company, local exchange company, or interconnected voice over internet protocol service company that appropriates or converts the tax collected to its own use or to any use other than the payment of the tax to the extent that the money collected is not available for payment on the due date as prescribed in this chapter is guilty of a gross misdemeanor.
(2) If any radio communications service company, local exchange company, or interconnected voice over internet protocol service company fails to collect the statewide 988 behavioral health crisis response and suicide prevention line tax or, after collecting the tax, fails to pay it to the department in the manner prescribed by this chapter, whether such failure is the result of its own act or the result of acts or conditions beyond its control, the company or seller is personally liable to the state for the amount of the tax, unless the company or seller has taken from the buyer in good faith documentation, in a form and manner prescribed by the department, stating that the buyer is not a subscriber or consumer or is otherwise not liable for the statewide 988 behavioral health crisis response and suicide prevention line tax.
(3) The amount of tax, until paid by the subscriber to the radio communications service company, local exchange company, the interconnected voice over internet protocol service company, or to the department, constitutes a debt from the subscriber to the company, or from the consumer to the seller. Any company or seller that fails or refuses to collect the tax as required with intent to violate the provisions of this chapter or to gain some advantage or benefit, either direct or indirect, and any subscriber or consumer who refuses to pay any tax due under this chapter is guilty of a misdemeanor. The statewide 988 behavioral health crisis response and suicide prevention line tax required by this chapter to be collected by the radio communications service company, local exchange company, or interconnected voice over internet protocol service company must be stated separately on the billing statement that is sent to the subscriber.
(4) If a subscriber has failed to pay to the radio communications service company, local exchange company, or interconnected voice over internet protocol service company, the statewide 988 behavioral health crisis response and suicide prevention line tax imposed by this chapter and the company or seller has not paid the amount of the tax to the department, the department may, in its discretion, proceed directly against the subscriber or consumer for collection of the tax, in which case a penalty of 10 percent may be added to the amount of the tax for failure of the subscriber or consumer to pay the tax to the company or seller, regardless of when the tax is collected by the department.

## Section 205
(1) The statewide 988 behavioral health crisis response and suicide prevention line account is created in the state treasury. All receipts from the statewide 988 behavioral health crisis response and suicide prevention line tax imposed pursuant to this chapter must be deposited into the account. Moneys may only be spent after appropriation.
(2) Expenditures from the account may only be used for (a) ensuring the efficient and effective routing of calls made to the 988 crisis hotline to an appropriate crisis hotline center or crisis call center hub; and (b) personnel and the provision of acute behavioral health, crisis outreach, and crisis stabilization services, as defined in RCW 71.24.025, by directly responding to the 988 crisis hotline.
(3) Moneys in the account may not be used to supplant general fund appropriations for behavioral health services or for medicaid covered services to individuals enrolled in the medicaid program.

## Section 206
A city or county may not impose a tax, measured on a per line basis, on radio access lines, interconnected voice over internet protocol service lines, or switched access lines, for the purpose of ensuring the efficient and effective routing of calls made to the 988 crisis hotline to an appropriate crisis hotline center or crisis call center hub; or providing personnel or acute behavioral health, crisis outreach, or crisis stabilization services, as defined in RCW 71.24.025, associated with directly responding to the 988 crisis hotline.

## Section 301
The appropriations in this section are provided to the department of health and are subject to the following conditions and limitations:
(1) The sum of $23,016,000, or as much thereof as may be necessary, is appropriated for the fiscal biennium ending June 30, 2023, from the statewide 988 behavioral health crisis response and suicide prevention line account. The amount in this subsection is provided solely for the department to route calls to and contract for the operations of call centers and call center hubs. This includes funding for operations, training, and call center information technology and program staff.
(2) The sum of $1,000,000, or as much thereof as may be necessary, is appropriated for the fiscal biennium ending June 30, 2023, from the statewide 988 behavioral health crisis response and suicide prevention line account. The amount in this subsection is provided solely for the department to contract for the development and operations of a tribal crisis line.
(3) The following sums, or so much thereof as may be necessary, are each appropriated: $189,000 from the statewide 988 behavioral health crisis response and suicide prevention line account for the fiscal biennium ending June 30, 2023; and $80,000 from the state general fund—federal account for the fiscal biennium ending June 30, 2023. The amounts in this subsection are provided solely for the department to provide staff support necessary to critically analyze the planning, development, and implementation of technology solutions to create the technical and operational plan pursuant to section 109 of this act.
(4) The sum of $420,000, or as much thereof as may be necessary, is appropriated for the fiscal biennium ending June 30, 2023, from the statewide 988 behavioral health crisis response and suicide prevention line account. The amount in this subsection is provided solely for the department to participate in and provide support to the committee created in section 103 of this act.

## Section 302
The appropriations in this section are provided to the state health care authority and are subject to the following conditions and limitations:
(1) The following sums, or as much thereof as may be necessary, are each appropriated: $770,000 from the statewide 988 behavioral health crisis response and suicide prevention line account for the fiscal biennium ending June 30, 2023; and $326,000 from the state general fund—federal account for the fiscal biennium ending June 30, 2023. The amounts in this subsection are provided solely for the authority to provide staff and contracted support necessary to critically analyze the planning, development, and implementation of technology solutions to create the technical and operational plan pursuant to section 109 of this act.
(2) The following sums, or so much thereof as may be necessary, are each appropriated: $644,000 from the statewide 988 behavioral health crisis response and suicide prevention line account for the fiscal biennium ending June 30, 2023; and $127,000 from the state general fund—federal account for the fiscal biennium ending June 30, 2023. The amounts in this subsection are provided solely for the authority to participate in and provide support to the committee created in section 103 of this act.
(3) The following sums, or as much thereof as may be necessary, are each appropriated: $381,000 from the statewide 988 behavioral health crisis response and suicide prevention line account for the fiscal biennium ending June 30, 2023; and $381,000 from the state general fund—federal account for the fiscal biennium ending June 30, 2023. The amounts in this subsection are provided solely for the authority to fulfill its duties as described in section 102(8) of this act. This includes funding for collaboration with managed care organizations, county authorities, and behavioral health administrative services organizations related to crisis services, and the development of processes and best practices for crisis services.

## Section 303
The sum of $200,000, or as much thereof as may be necessary, is appropriated for the fiscal biennium ending June 30, 2023, from the statewide 988 behavioral health crisis response and suicide prevention line account to the office of financial management and provided solely to provide staff and contracted services support to the committee created in section 103 of this act. 

## Section 403
> This section modifies existing section [71.24.649](/rcw/71_mental_illness/71.24_community_behavioral_health_services_act.md). Here is the [modified chapter](rcw/71_mental_illness/71.24_community_behavioral_health_services_act.md) for context.

The secretary shall license or certify mental health peer**-run** respite centers that meet state minimum standards. In consultation with the authority and the department of social and health services, the secretary must:

1. Establish requirements for licensed and certified community behavioral health agencies to provide mental health peer**-run** respite center services and establish physical plant and service requirements to provide voluntary, short-term, noncrisis services that focus on recovery and wellness;

2. Require licensed and certified agencies to partner with the local crisis system including, but not limited to, evaluation and treatment facilities and designated crisis responders;

3. Establish staffing requirements, including rules to ensure that facilities are peer-run;

4. Limit services to a maximum of seven days in a month;

5. Limit services to individuals who are experiencing psychiatric distress, but do not meet legal criteria for involuntary hospitalization under chapter 71.05 RCW; and

6. Limit services to persons at least eighteen years of age.

