# 29A.88 - Nuclear waste site—Election for disapproval.
* [29A.88.010 - Findings.](#29a88010---findings)
* [29A.88.020 - High-level repository—Selection of site in state—Special election for disapproval.](#29a88020---high-level-repositoryselection-of-site-in-statespecial-election-for-disapproval)
* [29A.88.030 - Costs of election.](#29a88030---costs-of-election)
* [29A.88.040 - Special election—Notification of auditors—Application of election laws.](#29a88040---special-electionnotification-of-auditorsapplication-of-election-laws)
* [29A.88.050 - Ballot title.](#29a88050---ballot-title)
* [29A.88.060 - Effect of vote.](#29a88060---effect-of-vote)
## 29A.88.010 - Findings.
1. The legislature and the people find that the federal Nuclear Waste Policy Act provides that within sixty days of the president's recommendation of a site for a high-level nuclear waste repository, a state may disapprove the selection of such site in that state.

2. The legislature and the people desire, if the governor and legislature do not issue a notice of disapproval within twenty-one days of the president's recommendation, that the people of this state have the opportunity to vote upon disapproval.

\[ [2003 c 111 § 2201](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/2003-04/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/Senate/5221-S.SL.pdf?cite=2003%20c%20111%20§%202201); [1986 ex.s. c 1 § 3](http://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1986ex1c1.pdf?cite=1986%20ex.s.%20c%201%20§%203); \]

## 29A.88.020 - High-level repository—Selection of site in state—Special election for disapproval.
1. Within seven days after any recommendation by the president of the United States of a site in the state of Washington to be a high-level nuclear waste repository under 42 U.S.C. Sec. 10136, the governor shall set the date for a special statewide election to vote on disapproval of the selection of such site. The special election shall be held not less than forty-five nor more than ninety days after the date of the recommendation of the president of the United States.

2. If either the governor or the legislature submits a notice of disapproval to the United States Congress within twenty-one days of the date of the recommendation by the president of the United States, then the governor is authorized to cancel the special election pursuant to subsection (1) of this section.

\[ [2013 c 11 § 85](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/2013-14/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/Senate/5518-S.SL.pdf?cite=2013%20c%2011%20§%2085); [2003 c 111 § 2202](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/2003-04/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/Senate/5221-S.SL.pdf?cite=2003%20c%20111%20§%202202); [1986 ex.s. c 1 § 4](http://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1986ex1c1.pdf?cite=1986%20ex.s.%20c%201%20§%204); \]

## 29A.88.030 - Costs of election.
The state of Washington shall assume the costs of any special election called under RCW 29A.88.020 in the same manner as provided in RCW 29A.04.420 and 29A.04.430.

\[ [2003 c 111 § 2203](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/2003-04/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/Senate/5221-S.SL.pdf?cite=2003%20c%20111%20§%202203); [1986 ex.s. c 1 § 5](http://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1986ex1c1.pdf?cite=1986%20ex.s.%20c%201%20§%205); \]

## 29A.88.040 - Special election—Notification of auditors—Application of election laws.
The secretary of state shall promptly notify the county auditors of the date of the special election and certify to them the text of the ballot title for this special election. The general election laws shall apply to the election required by RCW 29A.88.020 to the extent that they are not inconsistent with this chapter. Statutory deadlines relating to certification, canvassing, and the voters' pamphlet may be modified for the election held pursuant to RCW 29A.88.020 by the secretary of state through emergency rules adopted under RCW 29A.04.611.

\[ [2013 c 11 § 86](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/2013-14/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/Senate/5518-S.SL.pdf?cite=2013%20c%2011%20§%2086); [2003 c 111 § 2204](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/2003-04/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/Senate/5221-S.SL.pdf?cite=2003%20c%20111%20§%202204); [1986 ex.s. c 1 § 6](http://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1986ex1c1.pdf?cite=1986%20ex.s.%20c%201%20§%206); \]

## 29A.88.050 - Ballot title.
The ballot title for the special election called under RCW 29A.88.020 shall be "Shall the Governor be required to notify Congress of Washington's disapproval of the President's recommendation of [name of site] as a national high-level nuclear waste repository?"

\[ [2003 c 111 § 2205](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/2003-04/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/Senate/5221-S.SL.pdf?cite=2003%20c%20111%20§%202205); [1986 ex.s. c 1 § 7](http://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1986ex1c1.pdf?cite=1986%20ex.s.%20c%201%20§%207); \]

## 29A.88.060 - Effect of vote.
If the governor or the legislature fails to prepare and submit a notice of disapproval to the United States Congress within fifty-five days of the president's recommendation and a majority of the voters in the special election held pursuant to RCW 29A.88.020 favored such notice of disapproval, then the vote of the people shall be binding on the governor. The governor shall prepare and submit the notice of disapproval to the United States Congress pursuant to 42 U.S.C. Sec. 10136.

\[ [2003 c 111 § 2206](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/2003-04/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/Senate/5221-S.SL.pdf?cite=2003%20c%20111%20§%202206); [1986 ex.s. c 1 § 8](http://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1986ex1c1.pdf?cite=1986%20ex.s.%20c%201%20§%208); \]

