# 29A.80 - Political parties.
* [29A.80.010 - Rule-making authority.](#29a80010---rule-making-authority)
* [29A.80.020 - State committee.](#29a80020---state-committee)
* [29A.80.030 - County central committee—Organization meetings.](#29a80030---county-central-committeeorganization-meetings)
* [29A.80.031 - Precinct committee officer.](#29a80031---precinct-committee-officer)
* [29A.80.041 - Precinct committee officer, eligibility.](#29a80041---precinct-committee-officer-eligibility)
* [29A.80.051 - Precinct committee officer—Election—Term.](#29a80051---precinct-committee-officerelectionterm)
* [29A.80.061 - Legislative district chair—Election—Term—Removal.](#29a80061---legislative-district-chairelectiontermremoval)
## 29A.80.010 - Rule-making authority.
Each political party organization may adopt rules governing its own organization and the nonstatutory functions of that organization.

\[ 2005 c 2 § 14 (Initiative Measure No. 872, approved November 2, 2004); [2003 c 111 § 2001](https://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/2003-04/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/Senate/5221-S.SL.pdf?cite=2003%20c%20111%20§%202001); [1977 ex.s. c 329 § 16](https://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1977ex1c329.pdf?cite=1977%20ex.s.%20c%20329%20§%2016); [1965 c 9 § 29.42.010](https://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1965c9.pdf?cite=1965%20c%209%20§%2029.42.010); [1961 c 130 § 2](https://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1961c130.pdf?cite=1961%20c%20130%20§%202); prior: 1943 c 178 § 1, part; 1939 c 48 § 1, part; 1927 c 200 § 1, part; 1925 ex.s. c 158 § 1, part; 1909 c 82 § 6, part; 1907 c 209 § 22, part; Rem. Supp. 1943 § 5198, part; \]

## 29A.80.020 - State committee.
The state committee of each major political party consists of one committeeman and one committeewoman from each county elected by the county central committee at its organization meeting. It must have a chair and vice chair of opposite sexes. This committee shall meet during January of each odd-numbered year for the purpose of organization at a time and place designated by a notice mailed at least one week before the date of the meeting to all new state committeemen and committeewomen by the authorized officers of the retiring committee. At its organizational meeting it shall elect its chair and vice chair, and such officers as its bylaws may provide, and adopt bylaws, rules, and regulations. It may:

1. Call conventions at such time and place and under such circumstances and for such purposes as the call to convention designates. The manner, number, and procedure for selection of state convention delegates is subject to the committee's rules and regulations duly adopted;

2. Provide for the election of delegates to national conventions;

3. Provide for the nomination of presidential electors; and

4. Perform all functions inherent in such an organization.

Notwithstanding any provision of this chapter, the committee may not adopt rules governing the conduct of the actual proceedings at a party state convention.

\[ [2013 c 11 § 79](https://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/2013-14/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/Senate/5518-S.SL.pdf?cite=2013%20c%2011%20§%2079); [2003 c 111 § 2002](https://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/2003-04/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/Senate/5221-S.SL.pdf?cite=2003%20c%20111%20§%202002); [1987 c 295 § 11](https://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1987c295.pdf?cite=1987%20c%20295%20§%2011); [1972 ex.s. c 45 § 1](https://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1972ex1c45.pdf?cite=1972%20ex.s.%20c%2045%20§%201); [1965 c 9 § 29.42.020](https://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1965c9.pdf?cite=1965%20c%209%20§%2029.42.020); [1961 c 130 § 3](https://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1961c130.pdf?cite=1961%20c%20130%20§%203); prior: 1943 c 178 § 1, part; 1939 c 48 § 1, part; 1927 c 200 § 1, part; 1925 ex.s. c 158 § 1, part; 1909 c 82 § 6, part; 1907 c 209 § 22, part; Rem. Supp. 1943 § 5198, part; \]

## 29A.80.030 - County central committee—Organization meetings.
The county central committee of each major political party consists of the precinct committee officers of the party from the several voting precincts of the county. Following each state general election held in even-numbered years, this committee shall meet for the purpose of organization at an easily accessible location within the county, subsequent to the certification of precinct committee officers by the county auditor and no later than the second Saturday of the following January. The authorized officers of the retiring committee shall cause notice of the time and place of the meeting to be mailed to each precinct committee officer at least seventy-two hours before the date of the meeting.

At its organization meeting, the county central committee shall elect a chair and vice chair of opposite sexes.

\[ [2003 c 111 § 2003](https://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/2003-04/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/Senate/5221-S.SL.pdf?cite=2003%20c%20111%20§%202003); [1987 c 295 § 12](https://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1987c295.pdf?cite=1987%20c%20295%20§%2012); [1973 c 85 § 1](https://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1973c85.pdf?cite=1973%20c%2085%20§%201); [1973 c 4 § 5](https://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1973c4.pdf?cite=1973%20c%204%20§%205); [1965 c 9 § 29.42.030](https://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1965c9.pdf?cite=1965%20c%209%20§%2029.42.030); [1961 c 130 § 4](https://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1961c130.pdf?cite=1961%20c%20130%20§%204); prior: 1943 c 178 § 1, part; 1939 c 48 § 1, part; 1927 c 200 § 1, part; 1925 ex.s. c 158 § 1, part; 1909 c 82 § 6, part; 1907 c 209 § 22, part; Rem. Supp. 1943 § 5198, part; \]

## 29A.80.031 - Precinct committee officer.
If a vacancy occurs in the office of precinct committee officer by reason of death, resignation, or disqualification of the incumbent, or because of failure to elect, the respective county chair of the county central committee shall fill the vacancy by appointment. However, in a legislative district having a majority of its precincts in a county with a population of one million or more, the appointment may be made only upon the recommendation of the legislative district chair. The person so appointed must have the same qualifications as candidates when filing for election to the office for that precinct. When a vacancy in the office of precinct committee officer exists because of failure to elect at a state primary, the vacancy may not be filled until after the organization meeting of the county central committee and the new county chair has been selected as provided by RCW 29A.80.030.

\[ [2004 c 271 § 120](https://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/2003-04/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/Senate/6453.SL.pdf?cite=2004%20c%20271%20§%20120); \]

## 29A.80.041 - Precinct committee officer, eligibility.
Any member of a major political party who is a registered voter in the precinct and who will be at least eighteen years old by the date of the precinct committee officer election may file his or her declaration of candidacy as prescribed under RCW 29A.24.031 with the county auditor for the office of precinct committee officer of his or her party in that precinct. When elected at the primary, the precinct committee officer shall serve so long as the committee officer remains an eligible voter in that precinct.

\[ [2020 c 208 § 19](https://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/2019-20/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/Senate/6313.SL.pdf?cite=2020%20c%20208%20§%2019); [2009 c 106 § 3](https://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/2009-10/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/Senate/5271-S.SL.pdf?cite=2009%20c%20106%20§%203); [2004 c 271 § 148](https://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/2003-04/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/Senate/6453.SL.pdf?cite=2004%20c%20271%20§%20148); \]

## 29A.80.051 - Precinct committee officer—Election—Term.
The statutory requirements for filing as a candidate at the primaries apply to candidates for precinct committee officer. The office must be voted upon at the primaries, and the names of all candidates in contested races must appear under the proper party and office designations on the ballot for the primary for each even-numbered year. The candidate receiving the highest number of votes will be declared elected. The term of office of precinct committee officer is two years, commencing the first day of December following the primary.

\[ [2012 c 89 § 5](https://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/2011-12/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/House/1860-S3.SL.pdf?cite=2012%20c%2089%20§%205); [2004 c 271 § 149](https://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/2003-04/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/Senate/6453.SL.pdf?cite=2004%20c%20271%20§%20149); \]

## 29A.80.061 - Legislative district chair—Election—Term—Removal.
Within forty-five days after the statewide general election in even-numbered years, the county chair of each major political party shall call separate meetings of all elected precinct committee officers in each legislative district for the purpose of electing a legislative district chair in such district. The district chair shall hold office until the next legislative district reorganizational meeting two years later, or until a successor is elected.

The legislative district chair may be removed only by the majority vote of the elected precinct committee officers in the chair's district.

\[ [2004 c 271 § 150](https://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/2003-04/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/Senate/6453.SL.pdf?cite=2004%20c%20271%20§%20150); \]

