[wa-law.org](/) > [bill](/bill/) > [2023-24](/bill/2023-24/) > [SB 6206](/bill/2023-24/sb/6206/) > [Original Bill](/bill/2023-24/sb/6206/1/)

# SB 6206 - Water system receivership

[Source](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/2023-24/Pdf/Bills/Senate%20Bills/6206.pdf)

## Section 1
1. In any action brought by the secretary of health or by a local health officer pursuant to chapter 7.60 RCW to place a public water system in receivership, the petition shall include the names of one or more suitable candidates for receiver who have consented to assume operation of the water system. The department shall maintain a list of interested and qualified individuals, municipal entities, special purpose districts, and investor-owned water companies with experience in the provision of water service and a history of satisfactory operation of a water system. If there is no other person willing and able to be named as receiver, the court shall appoint the public utility district or water-sewer district in which the water system is located as receiver. If no public utility district or water-sewer district operates in the county where the water system is located, the court shall appoint the county in which the water system is located as the receiver. The county may designate a county agency to operate the system, or it may contract with another individual or public water system to provide management for the system. If the county is appointed as receiver, the secretary of health and the county health officer shall provide regulatory oversight for the agency or other person responsible for managing the water system.

2. In any petition for receivership under subsection (1) of this section, the department shall recommend that the court grant to the receiver full authority to act in the best interests of the customers served by the public water system. The receiver shall assess the capability, in conjunction with the department and local government, for the system to operate in compliance with health and safety standards, and shall report to the court and the petitioning agency its recommendations for the system's future operation, including the formation of a water-sewer district or other public entity, or ownership by another existing water system capable of providing service.

3. If a petition for receivership and verifying affidavit executed by an appropriate departmental official allege an immediate and serious danger to residents constituting an emergency, the court shall set the matter for hearing within three days and may appoint a temporary receiver ex parte upon the strength of such petition and affidavit pending a full evidentiary hearing, which shall be held within fourteen days after receipt of the petition.

4. A bond, if any is imposed upon a receiver, shall be minimal and shall reasonably relate to the level of operating revenue generated by the system. Any receiver appointed pursuant to this section shall not be held personally liable for any good faith, reasonable effort to assume possession of, and to operate, the system in compliance with the court's orders.

5. The court shall authorize the receiver to impose reasonable assessments on a water system's customers to recover expenditures for improvements necessary for the public health and safety.

6. No later than twelve months after appointment of a receiver, the petitioning agency, in conjunction with the receiver, and the appropriate state and local health agencies, shall develop and present to the court a plan for the disposition of the system. The report shall include the recommendations of the receiver made pursuant to subsection (2) of this section. The report shall include all reasonable and feasible alternatives. After receiving the report, the court shall provide notice to interested parties and conduct such hearings as are necessary. The court shall then order the parties to implement one of the alternatives, or any combination thereof, for the disposition of the system. Such order shall include a date, or proposed date, for the termination of the receivership. Nothing in this section authorizes a court to require a city, town,  or irrigation district to accept a system that has been in receivership unless the city, town,  or irrigation district agrees to the terms and conditions outlined in the plan adopted by the court.

7. The court shall not terminate the receivership, and order the return of the system to the owners, unless the department of health approves of such an action. The court may impose reasonable conditions upon the return of the system to the owner, including the posting of a bond or other security, routine performance and financial audits, employment of qualified operators and other staff or contracted services, compliance with financial viability requirements, or other measures sufficient to ensure the ongoing proper operation of the system.

8. If, as part of the ultimate disposition of the system, an eminent domain action is commenced by a public entity to acquire the system, the court shall oversee any appraisal of the system conducted under Title 7 RCW to assure that the appraised value properly reflects any reduced value because of the necessity to make improvements to the system. The court shall have the authority to approve the appraisal, and to modify it based on any information provided at an evidentiary hearing. The court's determination of the proper value of the system, based on the appraisal, shall be final, and only appealable if not supported by substantial evidence. If the appraised value is appealed, the court may order that the system's ownership be transferred upon payment of the approved appraised value.

## Section 2
1. Each purveyor within the boundaries of a critical water supply service area shall develop a water system plan for the purveyor's future service area if such a plan has not already been developed: PROVIDED, That nonmunicipally owned public water systems are exempt from the planning requirements of this chapter, except for the establishment of service area boundaries if they have no plans for water service beyond their existing service area: PROVIDED FURTHER, That if the county legislative authority permits a change in development that will increase the demand for water service of such a system beyond the existing system's ability to provide minimum water service, the purveyor shall develop a water system plan in accordance with this section. The establishment of future service area boundaries shall be in accordance with RCW 70A.100.070.

2. After the boundaries of a critical water supply service area have been established pursuant to RCW 70A.100.040, the committee established in RCW 70A.100.040 shall participate in the development of a coordinated water system plan for the designated area. Such a plan shall incorporate all water system plans developed pursuant to subsection (1) of this section. The plan shall provide for maximum integration and coordination of public water system facilities consistent with the protection and enhancement of the public health and well-being. Decisions of the committee shall be by majority vote of those present at meetings of the committee.

3. Those portions of a critical water supply service area not yet served by a public water system shall have a coordinated water system plan developed by existing purveyors based upon permitted densities in county plans, ordinances, and/or growth policies for a minimum of five years beyond the date of establishment of the boundaries of the critical water supply service area.

4. To insure that the plan incorporates the proper designs to protect public health, the secretary shall adopt regulations pursuant to chapter 34.05 RCW concerning the scope and content of coordinated water system plans, and shall ensure, as minimum requirements, that such plans:

    a. Are reviewed by the appropriate local governmental agency to insure that the plan is not inconsistent with the land use plans, shoreline master programs, and/or developmental policies of the general purpose local government or governments whose jurisdiction the water system plan affects.

    b. Recognize all water resource plans, water quality plans, and water pollution control plans which have been adopted by units of local, regional, and state government.

    c. Incorporate the fire protection standards developed pursuant to RCW 70A.100.080.

    d. Identify the future service area boundaries of the public water system or systems included in the plan within the critical water supply service area.

    e. Identify feasible emergency inter-ties between adjacent purveyors.

    f. Include satellite system management requirements consistent with RCW 70A.100.130.

    g. Include policies and procedures that generally address failing water systems for which counties, public utility districts, or water-sewer districts may become responsible under RCW 43.70.195.

5. If a "water general plan" for a critical water supply service area or portion thereof has been prepared pursuant to chapter 36.94 RCW and such a plan meets the requirements of subsections (1) and (4) of this section, such a plan shall constitute the coordinated water system plan for the applicable geographical area.

6. The committee established in RCW 70A.100.040 may develop and utilize a mechanism for addressing disputes that arise in the development of the coordinated water system plan.

7. Prior to the submission of a coordinated water system plan to the secretary for approval pursuant to RCW 70A.100.060, the legislative authorities of the counties in which the critical water supply service area is located shall hold a public hearing thereon and shall determine the plan's consistency with subsection (4) of this section. If within sixty days of receipt of the plan, the legislative authorities find any segment of a proposed service area of a purveyor's plan or any segment of the coordinated water system plan to be inconsistent with any current land use plans, shoreline master programs, and/or developmental policies of the general purpose local government or governments whose jurisdiction the water system plan affects, the secretary shall not approve that portion of the plan until the inconsistency is resolved between the local government and the purveyor. If no comments have been received from the legislative authorities within sixty days of receipt of the plan, the secretary may consider the plan for approval.

8. Any county legislative authority may adopt an abbreviated plan for the provision of water supplies within its boundaries that includes provisions for service area boundaries, minimum design criteria, and review process. The elements of the abbreviated plan shall conform to the criteria established by the department under subsection (4) of this section and shall otherwise be consistent with other adopted land use and resource plans. The county legislative authority may, in lieu of the committee required under RCW 70A.100.040, and the procedures authorized in this section, utilize an advisory committee that is representative of the water utilities and local governments within its jurisdiction to assist in the preparation of the abbreviated plan, which may be adopted by resolution and submitted to the secretary for approval. Purveyors within the boundaries covered by the abbreviated plan need not develop a water system plan, except to the extent required by the secretary or state board of health under other authority. Any abbreviated plan adopted by a county legislative authority pursuant to this subsection shall be subject to the same provisions contained in RCW 70A.100.060 for coordinated water system plans that are approved by the secretary.
