# House Bill 1338

[Source](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/2021-22/Xml/Bills/House%20Bills/1338.xml)
## Section 1
(1) The legislature finds that Article IX, section 1 of the state Constitution provides that "It is the paramount duty of the state to make ample provision for the education of all children residing within its borders, without distinction or preference on account of race, color, caste, or sex."
(2) On February 29, 2020, the governor issued proclamation 20-05 declaring a state of emergency for the state of Washington due to illness and death resulting from the COVID-19 pandemic.
(3) In March 2020, the governor ordered an emergency closure of all Washington public schools due to the COVID-19 pandemic. Schools remained closed for the remainder of the 2019-20 school year.
(4) Washington public schools stepped up to provide extraordinary services during the COVID-19 related shutdown, including setting up day care centers to allow first responders and health care workers to continue going to work saving lives, and distributing essential meals not only to students but directly to families in need.
(5) Federal, state, and local regulations and public health guidelines have been continuously updated due to the uncertainty, developing knowledge, and the everchanging nature of the COVID-19 pandemic.
(6) The COVID-19 pandemic has placed extraordinary burdens on students, families, educators, and schools. There is no fully equitable manner to deliver all of the educational and other essential services schools provide without some in-person services. Yet, as shown by the COVID-19 infection rate in even the most highly controlled adult-only environments, there is no way to make a school or any in-person environment completely safe during a pandemic. As schools restart and expand in-person services during this health emergency, they are once again asked to do the extraordinary — increase equity in education while also adding expansive new safety protections so that any in-person services can be delivered more safely. Both goals require additional financial resources, at a time when state resources have been substantially depleted due to the impact of the COVID-19 pandemic.
(7) Public schools operating during the COVID-19 pandemic must focus their time and limited resources on fulfilling their paramount duty to educate the children of Washington. Doing so requires thoughtful planning on how to use scarce financial resources to further equitable access and delivery of essential educational services while also increasing training and implementing costly safety precautions. Limited public funds allocated to schools during the COVID-19 pandemic should not be diverted to costly new litigation and liability exposure arising from the COVID-19 pandemic.
