# 46.52 - Accidents—Reports—Abandoned vehicles.
* [46.52.010 - Duty on striking unattended car or other property—Penalty.](#4652010---duty-on-striking-unattended-car-or-other-propertypenalty)
* [46.52.020 - Duty in case of personal injury or death or damage to attended vehicle or other property—Penalties.](#4652020---duty-in-case-of-personal-injury-or-death-or-damage-to-attended-vehicle-or-other-propertypenalties)
* [46.52.030 - Accident reports.](#4652030---accident-reports)
* [46.52.035 - Accident reports—Suspension of license or permit for failure to make report.](#4652035---accident-reportssuspension-of-license-or-permit-for-failure-to-make-report)
* [46.52.040 - Accident reports—Report when operator disabled.](#4652040---accident-reportsreport-when-operator-disabled)
* [46.52.050 - Coroner's reports to sheriff and state patrol.](#4652050---coroners-reports-to-sheriff-and-state-patrol)
* [46.52.060 - Tabulation and analysis of reports—Availability for use.](#4652060---tabulation-and-analysis-of-reportsavailability-for-use)
* [46.52.065 - Blood samples to state toxicologist—Analysis—Availability, admissibility of reports.](#4652065---blood-samples-to-state-toxicologistanalysisavailability-admissibility-of-reports)
* [46.52.070 - Police officer's report.](#4652070---police-officers-report)
* [46.52.080 - Confidentiality of reports—Information required to be disclosed—Evidence.](#4652080---confidentiality-of-reportsinformation-required-to-be-disclosedevidence)
* [46.52.083 - Confidentiality of reports—Availability of factual data to interested parties.](#4652083---confidentiality-of-reportsavailability-of-factual-data-to-interested-parties)
* [46.52.085 - Confidentiality of reports—Fee for written information.](#4652085---confidentiality-of-reportsfee-for-written-information)
* [46.52.088 - Reports—False information.](#4652088---reportsfalse-information)
* [46.52.090 - Reports of major repairs, etc.—Violations, penalties—Rules—Exceptions for older vehicles.](#4652090---reports-of-major-repairs-etcviolations-penaltiesrulesexceptions-for-older-vehicles)
* [46.52.101 - Records of traffic charges, dispositions.](#4652101---records-of-traffic-charges-dispositions)
* [46.52.120 - Case record of convictions and infractions.](#4652120---case-record-of-convictions-and-infractions)
* [46.52.130 - Abstract of driving record—Access—Fee—Violations.](#4652130---abstract-of-driving-recordaccessfeeviolations)
## 46.52.010 - Duty on striking unattended car or other property—Penalty.
1. The operator of any vehicle which collided with any other vehicle which is unattended shall immediately stop and shall then and there either locate and notify the operator or owner of such vehicle of the name and address of the operator and owner of the vehicle striking the unattended vehicle or shall leave in a conspicuous place in the vehicle struck a written notice, giving the name and address of the operator and of the owner of the vehicle striking such other vehicle.

2. The driver of any vehicle involved in an accident resulting only in damage to property fixed or placed upon or adjacent to any public highway shall take reasonable steps to locate and notify the owner or person in charge of such property of such fact and of the name and address of the operator and owner of the vehicle striking such property, or shall leave in a conspicuous place upon the property struck a written notice, giving the name and address of the operator and of the owner of the vehicle so striking the property, and such person shall further make report of such accident as in the case of other accidents upon the public highways of this state.

3. Any person violating this section is guilty of a misdemeanor.

\[ [2003 c 53 § 241](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/2003-04/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/Senate/5758.SL.pdf?cite=2003%20c%2053%20§%20241); [1979 ex.s. c 136 § 79](http://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1979ex1c136.pdf?cite=1979%20ex.s.%20c%20136%20§%2079); [1961 c 12 § 46.52.010](http://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1961c12.pdf?cite=1961%20c%2012%20§%2046.52.010); [1937 c 189 § 133](http://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1937c189.pdf?cite=1937%20c%20189%20§%20133); RRS § 6360-133; 1927 c 309 § 50, part; RRS § 6362-50, part; \]

## 46.52.020 - Duty in case of personal injury or death or damage to attended vehicle or other property—Penalties.
1. A driver of any vehicle involved in an accident resulting in the injury to or death of any person or involving striking the body of a deceased person shall immediately stop such vehicle at the scene of such accident or as close thereto as possible but shall then forthwith return to, and in every event remain at, the scene of such accident until he or she has fulfilled the requirements of subsection (3) of this section; every such stop shall be made without obstructing traffic more than is necessary.

2. [Empty]
    a. The driver of any vehicle involved in an accident resulting only in damage to a vehicle which is driven or attended by any person or damage to other property must move the vehicle as soon as possible off the roadway or freeway main lanes, shoulders, medians, and adjacent areas to a location on an exit ramp shoulder, the frontage road, the nearest suitable cross street, or other suitable location. The driver shall remain at the suitable location until he or she has fulfilled the requirements of subsection (3) of this section. Moving the vehicle in no way affects fault for an accident.

    b. A law enforcement officer or representative of the department of transportation may cause a motor vehicle, cargo, or debris to be moved from the roadway; and neither the department of transportation representative, nor anyone acting under the direction of the officer or the department of transportation representative is liable for damage to the motor vehicle, cargo, or debris caused by reasonable efforts of removal.

3. Unless otherwise provided in subsection (7) of this section the driver of any vehicle involved in an accident resulting in injury to or death of any person, or involving striking the body of a deceased person, or resulting in damage to any vehicle which is driven or attended by any person or damage to other property shall give his or her name, address, insurance company, insurance policy number, and vehicle license number and shall exhibit his or her vehicle driver's license to any person struck or injured or the driver or any occupant of, or any person attending, any such vehicle collided with and shall render to any person injured in such accident reasonable assistance, including the carrying or the making of arrangements for the carrying of such person to a physician or hospital for medical treatment if it is apparent that such treatment is necessary or if such carrying is requested by the injured person or on his or her behalf. Under no circumstances shall the rendering of assistance or other compliance with the provisions of this subsection be evidence of the liability of any driver for such accident.

4. [Empty]
    a. Any driver covered by the provisions of subsection (1) of this section failing to stop or comply with any of the requirements of subsection (3) of this section in the case of an accident resulting in death is guilty of a class B felony and, upon conviction, is punishable according to chapter 9A.20 RCW.

    b. Any driver covered by the provisions of subsection (1) of this section failing to stop or comply with any of the requirements of subsection (3) of this section in the case of an accident resulting in injury is guilty of a class C felony and, upon conviction, is punishable according to chapter 9A.20 RCW.

    c. Any driver covered by the provisions of subsection (1) of this section failing to stop or comply with any of the requirements of subsection (3) of this section in the case of an accident involving striking the body of a deceased person is guilty of a gross misdemeanor.

    d. This subsection shall not apply to any person injured or incapacitated by such accident to the extent of being physically incapable of complying with this section.

5. Any driver covered by the provisions of subsection (2) of this section failing to stop or to comply with any of the requirements of subsection (3) of this section under said circumstances shall be guilty of a gross misdemeanor: PROVIDED, That this provision shall not apply to any person injured or incapacitated by such accident to the extent of being physically incapable of complying herewith.

6. The license or permit to drive or any nonresident privilege to drive of any person convicted under this section or any local ordinance consisting of substantially the same language as this section of failure to stop and give information or render aid following an accident with any vehicle driven or attended by any person shall be revoked by the department.

7. If none of the persons specified are in condition to receive the information to which they otherwise would be entitled under subsection (3) of this section, and no police officer is present, the driver of any vehicle involved in such accident after fulfilling all other requirements of subsections (1) and (3) of this section insofar as possible on his or her part to be performed, shall forthwith report such accident to the nearest office of the duly authorized police authority and submit thereto the information specified in subsection (3) of this section.

\[ [2002 c 194 § 1](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/2001-02/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/House/2345.SL.pdf?cite=2002%20c%20194%20§%201); [2001 c 145 § 1](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/2001-02/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/House/1649-S.SL.pdf?cite=2001%20c%20145%20§%201); [2000 c 66 § 1](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/1999-00/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/Senate/6071-S.SL.pdf?cite=2000%20c%2066%20§%201); [1990 c 210 § 2](http://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1990c210.pdf?cite=1990%20c%20210%20§%202); [1980 c 97 § 1](http://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1980c97.pdf?cite=1980%20c%2097%20§%201); [1979 ex.s. c 136 § 80](http://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1979ex1c136.pdf?cite=1979%20ex.s.%20c%20136%20§%2080); 1975-'76 2nd ex.s. c 18 § 1; [1975 1st ex.s. c 210 § 1](http://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1975ex1c210.pdf?cite=1975%201st%20ex.s.%20c%20210%20§%201); [1975 c 62 § 14](http://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1975c62.pdf?cite=1975%20c%2062%20§%2014); [1967 c 32 § 53](http://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1967c32.pdf?cite=1967%20c%2032%20§%2053); [1961 c 12 § 46.52.020](http://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1961c12.pdf?cite=1961%20c%2012%20§%2046.52.020); prior:  1937 c 189 § 134; RRS § 6360-134; 1927 c 309 § 50, part; RRS § 6362-50, part; \]

## 46.52.030 - Accident reports.
1. Unless a report is to be made by a law enforcement officer under subsection (3) of this section, the driver of any vehicle involved in an accident resulting in injury to or death of any person or damage to the property of any one person to an apparent extent equal to or greater than the minimum amount established by rule adopted by the chief of the Washington state patrol in accordance with subsection (5) of this section, shall, within four days after such accident, make a written report of such accident to the chief of police of the city or town if such accident occurred within an incorporated city or town or the county sheriff or state patrol if such accident occurred outside incorporated cities and towns. Nothing in this subsection prohibits accident reports from being filed by drivers where damage to property is less than the minimum amount or where a law enforcement officer has submitted a report.

2. The original of the report shall be immediately forwarded by the authority receiving the report to the chief of the Washington state patrol at Olympia, Washington. The Washington state patrol shall give the department of licensing full access to the report.

3. Any law enforcement officer who investigates an accident for which a report is required under subsection (1) of this section shall submit an investigator's report as required by RCW 46.52.070.

4. The chief of the Washington state patrol may require any driver of any vehicle involved in an accident, of which report must be made as provided in this section, to file supplemental reports whenever the original report in the chief's opinion is insufficient, and may likewise require witnesses of any such accident to render reports. For this purpose, the chief of the Washington state patrol shall prepare and, upon request, supply to any police department, coroner, sheriff, and any other suitable agency or individual, sample forms of accident reports required hereunder, which reports shall be upon a form devised by the chief of the Washington state patrol and shall call for sufficiently detailed information to disclose all material facts with reference to the accident to be reported thereon, including the location, the circumstances, the conditions then existing, the persons and vehicles involved, the insurance information required under RCW 46.30.030, personal injury or death, if any, the amounts of property damage claimed, the total number of vehicles involved, whether the vehicles were legally parked, legally standing, or moving, whether such vehicles were occupied at the time of the accident, and whether any driver involved in the accident was distracted at the time of the accident. Distractions contributing to an accident must be reported on the accident form and include at least the following minimum reporting options: Not distracted; operating a handheld electronic telecommunication device; operating a hands-free wireless telecommunication device; other electronic devices (including, but not limited to, PDA's, laptop computers, navigational devices, etc.); adjusting an audio or entertainment system; smoking; eating or drinking; reading or writing; grooming; interacting with children, passengers, animals, or objects in the vehicle; other inside distractions; outside distractions; and distraction unknown. Every required accident report shall be made on a form prescribed by the chief of the Washington state patrol and each authority charged with the duty of receiving such reports shall provide sufficient report forms in compliance with the form devised. The report forms shall be designated so as to provide that a copy may be retained by the reporting person.

5. The chief of the Washington state patrol shall adopt rules establishing the accident-reporting threshold for property damage accidents. Beginning October 1, 1987, the accident-reporting threshold for property damage accidents shall be five hundred dollars. The accident-reporting threshold for property damage accidents shall be revised when necessary, but not more frequently than every two years. The revisions shall only be for the purpose of recognizing economic changes as reflected by an inflationary index recommended by the office of financial management. The revisions shall be guided by the change in the index for the time period since the last revision.

\[ [2005 c 171 § 1](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/2005-06/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/Senate/5161-S.SL.pdf?cite=2005%20c%20171%20§%201); [1997 c 248 § 1](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/1997-98/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/Senate/5539-S.SL.pdf?cite=1997%20c%20248%20§%201); [1996 c 183 § 1](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/1995-96/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/House/1964-S.SL.pdf?cite=1996%20c%20183%20§%201); [1989 c 353 § 5](http://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1989c353.pdf?cite=1989%20c%20353%20§%205); [1987 c 463 § 2](http://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1987c463.pdf?cite=1987%20c%20463%20§%202); [1981 c 30 § 1](http://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1981c30.pdf?cite=1981%20c%2030%20§%201); [1979 c 158 § 160](http://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1979c158.pdf?cite=1979%20c%20158%20§%20160); [1979 c 11 § 2](http://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1979c11.pdf?cite=1979%20c%2011%20§%202); [1977 ex.s. c 369 § 2](http://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1977ex1c369.pdf?cite=1977%20ex.s.%20c%20369%20§%202); [1977 ex.s. c 68 § 1](http://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1977ex1c68.pdf?cite=1977%20ex.s.%20c%2068%20§%201); [1969 ex.s. c 40 § 2](http://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1969ex1c40.pdf?cite=1969%20ex.s.%20c%2040%20§%202); [1967 c 32 § 54](http://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1967c32.pdf?cite=1967%20c%2032%20§%2054); [1965 ex.s. c 119 § 1](http://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1965ex1c119.pdf?cite=1965%20ex.s.%20c%20119%20§%201); [1961 c 12 § 46.52.030](http://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1961c12.pdf?cite=1961%20c%2012%20§%2046.52.030); prior:  1943 c 154 § 1; [1937 c 189 § 135](http://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1937c189.pdf?cite=1937%20c%20189%20§%20135); RRS § 6360-135; \]

## 46.52.035 - Accident reports—Suspension of license or permit for failure to make report.
The director may suspend the license or permit to drive and any nonresident operating privileges of any person failing to report an accident as provided in RCW 46.52.030 until such report has been filed.

\[ [1988 c 8 § 1](http://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1988c8.pdf?cite=1988%20c%208%20§%201); [1965 ex.s. c 119 § 2](http://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1965ex1c119.pdf?cite=1965%20ex.s.%20c%20119%20§%202); \]

## 46.52.040 - Accident reports—Report when operator disabled.
Whenever the driver of the vehicle involved in any accident, concerning which accident report is required, is physically incapable of making the required accident report and there is another occupant other than a passenger for hire therein, in the vehicle at the time of the accident capable of making a report, such occupant shall make or cause to be made such report. Upon recovery such driver shall make such report in the manner required by law.

\[ [1967 c 32 § 55](http://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1967c32.pdf?cite=1967%20c%2032%20§%2055); [1961 c 12 § 46.52.040](http://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1961c12.pdf?cite=1961%20c%2012%20§%2046.52.040); [1937 c 189 § 136](http://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1937c189.pdf?cite=1937%20c%20189%20§%20136); RRS § 6360-136; \]

## 46.52.050 - Coroner's reports to sheriff and state patrol.
Every coroner or other official performing like functions shall on or before the tenth day of each month, report in writing to the sheriff of the county in which he or she holds office and to the chief of the Washington state patrol the death of any person within his or her jurisdiction during the preceding calendar month as a result of an accident involving any vehicle, together with the circumstances of such accident.

\[ [2010 c 8 § 9059](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/2009-10/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/Senate/6239-S.SL.pdf?cite=2010%20c%208%20§%209059); [1961 c 12 § 46.52.050](http://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1961c12.pdf?cite=1961%20c%2012%20§%2046.52.050); [1937 c 189 § 137](http://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1937c189.pdf?cite=1937%20c%20189%20§%20137); RRS § 6360-137; \]

## 46.52.060 - Tabulation and analysis of reports—Availability for use.
It shall be the duty of the chief of the Washington state patrol to file, tabulate, and analyze all accident reports and to publish annually, immediately following the close of each fiscal year, and monthly during the course of the year, statistical information based thereon showing the number of accidents, the location, the frequency, whether any driver involved in the accident was distracted at the time of the accident and the circumstances thereof, and other statistical information which may prove of assistance in determining the cause of vehicular accidents. Distractions contributing to an accident to be reported must include at least the following: Not distracted; operating a handheld electronic telecommunication device; operating a hands-free wireless telecommunication device; other electronic devices (including, but not limited to, PDA's, laptop computers, navigational devices, etc.); adjusting an audio or entertainment system; smoking; eating or drinking; reading or writing; grooming; interacting with children, passengers, animals, or objects in the vehicle; other inside distractions; outside distractions; and distraction unknown.

Such accident reports and analysis or reports thereof shall be available to the director of licensing, the department of transportation, the utilities and transportation commission, the traffic safety commission, and other public entities authorized by the chief of the Washington state patrol, or their duly authorized representatives, for further tabulation and analysis for pertinent data relating to the regulation of highway traffic, highway construction, vehicle operators and all other purposes, and to publish information so derived as may be deemed of publication value.

\[ [2005 c 171 § 2](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/2005-06/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/Senate/5161-S.SL.pdf?cite=2005%20c%20171%20§%202); [1998 c 169 § 1](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/1997-98/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/House/1211-S.SL.pdf?cite=1998%20c%20169%20§%201); [1979 c 158 § 161](http://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1979c158.pdf?cite=1979%20c%20158%20§%20161); [1977 c 75 § 67](http://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1977c75.pdf?cite=1977%20c%2075%20§%2067); [1967 c 32 § 56](http://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1967c32.pdf?cite=1967%20c%2032%20§%2056); [1961 c 12 § 46.52.060](http://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1961c12.pdf?cite=1961%20c%2012%20§%2046.52.060); [1937 c 189 § 138](http://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1937c189.pdf?cite=1937%20c%20189%20§%20138); RRS § 6360-138; \]

## 46.52.065 - Blood samples to state toxicologist—Analysis—Availability, admissibility of reports.
Every coroner or other official performing like functions shall submit to the state toxicologist a blood sample taken from all drivers and all pedestrians who are killed in any traffic accident where the death occurred within four hours after the accident. Blood samples shall be taken and submitted in the manner prescribed by the state toxicologist. The state toxicologist shall analyze these blood samples to determine the concentration of alcohol and, where feasible, the presence of drugs or other toxic substances. The reports and records of the state toxicologist relating to analyses made pursuant to this section shall be confidential: PROVIDED, That the results of these analyses shall be reported to the state patrol and made available to the prosecuting attorney or law enforcement agency having jurisdiction: PROVIDED FURTHER, That the results of these analyses may be admitted in evidence in any civil or criminal action where relevant and shall be made available to the parties to any such litigation on application to the court.

\[ [1977 ex.s. c 50 § 1](http://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1977ex1c50.pdf?cite=1977%20ex.s.%20c%2050%20§%201); [1971 ex.s. c 270 § 1](http://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1971ex1c270.pdf?cite=1971%20ex.s.%20c%20270%20§%201); \]

## 46.52.070 - Police officer's report.
1. Any police officer of the state of Washington or of any county, city, town, or other political subdivision, present at the scene of any accident or in possession of any facts concerning any accident whether by way of official investigation or otherwise shall make report thereof in the same manner as required of the parties to such accident and as fully as the facts in his or her possession concerning such accident will permit.

2. The police officer shall report to the department, on a form prescribed by the director: (a) When a collision has occurred that results in a fatality; and (b) the identity of the operator of a vehicle involved in the collision when the officer has reasonable grounds to believe the operator caused the collision.

3. The police officer shall report to the department, on a form prescribed by the director: (a) When a collision has occurred that results in a serious injury; (b) the identity of the operator of a vehicle involved in the collision when the officer has reasonable grounds to believe the operator who caused the serious injury may not be competent to operate a motor vehicle; and (c) the reason or reasons for the officer's belief.

\[ [2010 c 8 § 9060](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/2009-10/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/Senate/6239-S.SL.pdf?cite=2010%20c%208%20§%209060); [1999 c 351 § 2](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/1999-00/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/House/1971-S.SL.pdf?cite=1999%20c%20351%20§%202); [1998 c 165 § 8](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/1997-98/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/House/2439-S.SL.pdf?cite=1998%20c%20165%20§%208); [1967 c 32 § 57](http://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1967c32.pdf?cite=1967%20c%2032%20§%2057); [1961 c 12 § 46.52.070](http://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1961c12.pdf?cite=1961%20c%2012%20§%2046.52.070); [1937 c 189 § 139](http://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1937c189.pdf?cite=1937%20c%20189%20§%20139); RRS § 6360-139; \]

## 46.52.080 - Confidentiality of reports—Information required to be disclosed—Evidence.
All required accident reports and supplemental reports and copies thereof shall be without prejudice to the individual so reporting and shall be for the confidential use of the county prosecuting attorney and chief of police or county sheriff, as the case may be, and the director of licensing and the chief of the Washington state patrol, and other officer or commission as authorized by law, except that any such officer shall disclose the names and addresses of persons reported as involved in an accident or as witnesses thereto, the vehicle license plate numbers and descriptions of vehicles involved, and the date, time and location of an accident, to any person who may have a proper interest therein, including the driver or drivers involved, or the legal guardian thereof, the parent of a minor driver, any person injured therein, the owner of vehicles or property damaged thereby, or any authorized representative of such an interested party, or the attorney or insurer thereof. No such accident report or copy thereof shall be used as evidence in any trial, civil or criminal, arising out of an accident, except that any officer above named for receiving accident reports shall furnish, upon demand of any person who has, or who claims to have, made such a report, or, upon demand of any court, a certificate showing that a specified accident report has or has not been made to the chief of the Washington state patrol solely to prove a compliance or a failure to comply with the requirement that such a report be made in the manner required by law: PROVIDED, That the reports may be used as evidence when necessary to prosecute charges filed in connection with a violation of RCW 46.52.088.

\[ [1979 c 158 § 162](http://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1979c158.pdf?cite=1979%20c%20158%20§%20162); [1975 c 62 § 15](http://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1975c62.pdf?cite=1975%20c%2062%20§%2015); [1967 c 32 § 58](http://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1967c32.pdf?cite=1967%20c%2032%20§%2058); [1965 ex.s. c 119 § 3](http://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1965ex1c119.pdf?cite=1965%20ex.s.%20c%20119%20§%203); [1961 c 12 § 46.52.080](http://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1961c12.pdf?cite=1961%20c%2012%20§%2046.52.080); [1937 c 189 § 140](http://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1937c189.pdf?cite=1937%20c%20189%20§%20140); RRS § 6360-140; \]

## 46.52.083 - Confidentiality of reports—Availability of factual data to interested parties.
All of the factual data submitted in report form by the officers, together with the signed statements of all witnesses, except the reports signed by the drivers involved in the accident, shall be made available upon request to the interested parties named in RCW 46.52.080.

\[ [1965 ex.s. c 119 § 4](http://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1965ex1c119.pdf?cite=1965%20ex.s.%20c%20119%20§%204); \]

## 46.52.085 - Confidentiality of reports—Fee for written information.
Any information authorized for release under RCW 46.52.080 and 46.52.083 may be furnished in written form for a fee sufficient to meet, but not exceed, the costs incurred. All fees received by the Washington state patrol for such copies shall be deposited in the motor vehicle fund.

\[ [1979 c 34 § 1](http://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1979c34.pdf?cite=1979%20c%2034%20§%201); [1971 ex.s. c 91 § 5](http://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1971ex1c91.pdf?cite=1971%20ex.s.%20c%2091%20§%205); [1965 ex.s. c 119 § 5](http://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1965ex1c119.pdf?cite=1965%20ex.s.%20c%20119%20§%205); \]

## 46.52.088 - Reports—False information.
A person shall not give information in oral or written reports as required in chapter 46.52 RCW knowing that such information is false.

\[ [1975 c 62 § 16](http://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1975c62.pdf?cite=1975%20c%2062%20§%2016); \]

## 46.52.090 - Reports of major repairs, etc.—Violations, penalties—Rules—Exceptions for older vehicles.
1. Any person, firm, corporation, or association engaged in the business of repairs of any kind to vehicles or any person, firm, corporation, or association which may at any time engage in any kind of major repair, restoration, or substantial alteration to a vehicle required to be licensed or registered under this title shall maintain verifiable records regarding the source of used major component parts used in such repairs, restoration, or alteration. Satisfactory records include but are not limited to personal identification of the seller if such parts were acquired from other than a vehicle wrecker licensed under chapter 46.80 RCW, signed work orders, and bills of sale signed by the seller whose identity and address has been verified describing parts acquired, and the make, model, and vehicle identification number of a vehicle from which the following parts are removed: (a) Engines and short blocks, (b) frames, (c) transmissions and transfer cases, (d) cabs, (e) doors, (f) front or rear differentials, (g) front or rear clips, (h) quarter panels or fenders, (i) bumpers, (j) truck beds or boxes, (k) seats, and (l) hoods.

2. The records required under subsection (1) of this section shall be kept for a period of four years and shall be made available for inspection by a law enforcement officer during ordinary business hours.

3. It is a gross misdemeanor to: (a) Acquire a part without a substantiating bill of sale or invoice from the parts supplier or fail to comply with any rules adopted under this section; (b) fail to obtain the vehicle identification number for those parts requiring that it be obtained; or (c) fail to keep records for four years or to make such records available during normal business hours to a law enforcement officer.

4. The chief of the Washington state patrol shall adopt rules for the purpose of regulating recordkeeping and parts acquisition by vehicle repairers, restorers, rebuilders, or those who perform substantial vehicle alterations.

5. The provisions of this section do not apply to major repair, restoration, or alteration of a vehicle thirty years of age or older.

\[ [2003 c 53 § 242](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/2003-04/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/Senate/5758.SL.pdf?cite=2003%20c%2053%20§%20242); [1983 c 142 § 1](http://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1983c142.pdf?cite=1983%20c%20142%20§%201); [1967 c 32 § 59](http://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1967c32.pdf?cite=1967%20c%2032%20§%2059); [1961 c 12 § 46.52.090](http://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1961c12.pdf?cite=1961%20c%2012%20§%2046.52.090); [1937 c 189 § 141](http://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1937c189.pdf?cite=1937%20c%20189%20§%20141); RRS § 6360-141; \]

## 46.52.101 - Records of traffic charges, dispositions.
1. Every district court, municipal court, and clerk of a superior court shall keep or cause to be kept a record of every traffic complaint, traffic citation, notice of infraction, or other legal form of traffic charge deposited with or presented to the court or a traffic violations bureau, and shall keep a record of every official action by the court or its traffic violations bureau regarding the charge, including but not limited to a record of every conviction, forfeiture of bail, judgment of acquittal, finding that a traffic infraction has been committed, dismissal of a notice of infraction, and the amount of fine, forfeiture, or penalty resulting from every traffic charge deposited with or presented to the court or traffic violations bureau. In the case of a record of a conviction for a violation of RCW 46.61.502 or 46.61.504, and notwithstanding any other provision of law, the court shall maintain the record permanently.

2. After the conviction, forfeiture of bail, or finding that a traffic infraction was committed for a violation of any provisions of this chapter or other law regulating the operating of vehicles on highways, the clerk of the court in which the conviction was had, bail was forfeited, or the finding of commission was made shall prepare and immediately forward to the director of licensing at Olympia an abstract of the court record covering the case. Report need not be made of a finding involving the illegal parking or standing of a vehicle.

3. The abstract must be made upon a form or forms furnished by the director and must include the name and address of the party charged, the number, if any, of the party's driver's or chauffeur's license, the registration number of the vehicle involved if required by the director, the nature of the offense, the date of hearing, the plea, the judgment, whether the offense was an alcohol-related offense as defined in RCW 46.01.260(2), whether the incident that gave rise to the offense charged resulted in a fatality, whether bail was forfeited, whether the determination that a traffic infraction was committed was contested, and the amount of the fine, forfeiture, or penalty, as the case may be.

4. In courts where the judicial information system or other secure method of electronic transfer of information has been implemented between the court and the department of licensing, the court may electronically provide the information required in subsections (2), (3), and (5) of this section.

5. The superior court clerk shall also forward a like report to the director upon the conviction of a person of a felony in the commission of which a vehicle was used.

6. The director shall keep all abstracts received under this section at the director's office in Olympia. The abstracts must be open to public inspection during reasonable business hours.

7. The officer, prosecuting attorney, or city attorney signing the charge or information in a case involving a charge of driving under the influence of intoxicating liquor or any drug shall immediately request from the director an abstract of convictions and forfeitures. The director shall furnish the requested abstract.

\[ [2006 c 327 § 6](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/2005-06/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/Senate/6552-S.SL.pdf?cite=2006%20c%20327%20§%206); [1999 c 86 § 4](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/1999-00/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/Senate/5301.SL.pdf?cite=1999%20c%2086%20§%204); \]

## 46.52.120 - Case record of convictions and infractions.
1. The director shall keep a case record on every motor vehicle driver licensed under the laws of this state, together with information on each driver, showing all the convictions and findings of traffic infractions certified by the courts, together with an index cross-reference record of each accident reported relating to such individual with a brief statement of the cause of the accident and whether or not the accident resulted in any fatality.

2. The records shall be for the confidential use of the director, the chief of the Washington state patrol, the director of the Washington traffic safety commission, and for such police officers or other cognizant public officials as may be designated by law. Such case records shall not be admitted into evidence in any court, except where relevant to the prosecution or defense of a criminal charge, or in case appeal is taken from the order of the director, suspending, revoking, canceling, or refusing a vehicle driver's license.

3. The director shall tabulate and analyze vehicle driver's case records and suspend, revoke, cancel, or refuse a vehicle driver's license to a person when it is deemed from facts contained in the case record of such person that it is for the best interest of public safety that such person be denied the privilege of operating a motor vehicle. The director shall also suspend a person's driver's license if the person fails to attend or complete a driver improvement interview or fails to abide by conditions of probation under RCW 46.20.335. Whenever the director orders the vehicle driver's license of any such person suspended, revoked, or canceled, or refuses the issuance of a vehicle driver's license, such suspension, revocation, cancellation, or refusal is final and effective unless appeal from the decision of the director is taken as provided by law.

\[ [2017 c 147 § 9](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/2017-18/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/House/1813-S.SL.pdf?cite=2017%20c%20147%20§%209); [2016 c 197 § 4](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/2015-16/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/House/2883.SL.pdf?cite=2016%20c%20197%20§%204); [1998 c 218 § 1](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/1997-98/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/House/1083-S.SL.pdf?cite=1998%20c%20218%20§%201); [1998 c 165 § 10](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/1997-98/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/House/2439-S.SL.pdf?cite=1998%20c%20165%20§%2010); [1993 c 501 § 12](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/1993-94/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/House/1741-S.SL.pdf?cite=1993%20c%20501%20§%2012); [1992 c 32 § 3](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/1991-92/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/Senate/6140.SL.pdf?cite=1992%20c%2032%20§%203); [1989 c 178 § 23](http://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1989c178.pdf?cite=1989%20c%20178%20§%2023); [1988 c 38 § 2](http://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1988c38.pdf?cite=1988%20c%2038%20§%202); [1984 c 99 § 1](http://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1984c99.pdf?cite=1984%20c%2099%20§%201); [1982 c 52 § 1](http://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1982c52.pdf?cite=1982%20c%2052%20§%201); [1979 ex.s. c 136 § 83](http://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1979ex1c136.pdf?cite=1979%20ex.s.%20c%20136%20§%2083); [1977 ex.s. c 356 § 1](http://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1977ex1c356.pdf?cite=1977%20ex.s.%20c%20356%20§%201); [1967 c 32 § 62](http://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1967c32.pdf?cite=1967%20c%2032%20§%2062); [1961 c 12 § 46.52.120](http://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1961c12.pdf?cite=1961%20c%2012%20§%2046.52.120); prior:  1937 c 189 § 144; RRS § 6360-144; \]

## 46.52.130 - Abstract of driving record—Access—Fee—Violations.
Upon a proper request, the department may only furnish information contained in an abstract of a person's driving record as permitted under this section.

1. Contents of abstract of driving record. An abstract of a person's driving record, whenever possible, must include:

    a. An enumeration of motor vehicle accidents in which the person was driving, including:

        i. The total number of vehicles involved;

        ii. Whether the vehicles were legally parked or moving;

        iii. Whether the vehicles were occupied at the time of the accident; and

        iv. Whether the accident resulted in a fatality;

    b. Any reported convictions, forfeitures of bail, or findings that an infraction was committed based upon a violation of any motor vehicle law;

    c. The status of the person's driving privilege in this state; and

    d. Any reports of failure to appear in response to a traffic citation or failure to respond to a notice of infraction served upon the named individual by an arresting officer.

2. Release of abstract of driving record. Unless otherwise required in this section, the release of an abstract does not require a signed statement by the subject of the abstract. An abstract of a person's driving record may be furnished to the following persons or entities:

    a. Named individuals. (i) An abstract of the full driving record maintained by the department may be furnished to the individual named in the abstract.

        ii. Nothing in this section prevents a court from providing a copy of the driver's abstract to the individual named in the abstract or that named individual's attorney, provided that the named individual has a pending or open infraction or criminal case in that court. A pending case includes criminal cases that have not reached a disposition by plea, stipulation, trial, or amended charge. An open infraction or criminal case includes cases on probation, payment agreement or subject to, or in collections. Courts may charge a reasonable fee for the production and copying of the abstract for the individual.

    b. Employers or prospective employers. (i) An abstract of the full driving record maintained by the department may be furnished to an employer or prospective employer or agents acting on behalf of an employer or prospective employer of the named individual for purposes related to driving by the individual as a condition of employment or otherwise at the direction of the employer.

        ii. The department may provide employers or their agents a three-year insurance carrier driving record of existing employees only for the purposes of sharing the driving record with its insurance carrier for underwriting. Employers may not provide the employees' full driving records to its insurance carrier.

        iii. An abstract of the full driving record maintained by the department may be furnished to an employer or prospective employer or the agent(s) acting on behalf of an employer or prospective employer of the named individual for purposes unrelated to driving by the individual when a driving record is required by federal or state law, or the employee or prospective employee will be handling heavy equipment or machinery.

        iv. Release of an abstract of the driving record of an employee or prospective employee requires a statement signed by: (A) The employee or prospective employee that authorizes the release of the record; and (B) the employer attesting that the information is necessary for employment purposes related to driving by the individual as a condition of employment or otherwise at the direction of the employer. If the employer or prospective employer authorizes agents to obtain this information on their behalf, this must be noted in the statement. The statement must also note that any information contained in the abstract related to an adjudication that is subject to a court order sealing the juvenile record of an employee or prospective employee may not be used by the employer or prospective employer, or an agent authorized to obtain this information on their behalf, unless required by federal regulation or law. The employer or prospective employer must afford the employee or prospective employee an opportunity to demonstrate that an adjudication contained in the abstract is subject to a court order sealing the juvenile record.

    v. Upon request of the person named in the abstract provided under this subsection, and upon that same person furnishing copies of court records ruling that the person was not at fault in a motor vehicle accident, the department must indicate on any abstract provided under this subsection that the person was not at fault in the motor vehicle accident.

    vi. No employer or prospective employer, nor any agents of an employer or prospective employer, may use information contained in the abstract related to an adjudication that is subject to a court order sealing the juvenile record of an employee or prospective employee for any purpose unless required by federal regulation or law. The employee or prospective employee must furnish a copy of the court order sealing the juvenile record to the employer or prospective employer, or the agents of the employer or prospective employer, as may be required to ensure the application of this subsection.

    c. Volunteer organizations. (i) An abstract of the full driving record maintained by the department may be furnished to a volunteer organization or an agent for a volunteer organization for which the named individual has submitted an application for a position that would require driving by the individual at the direction of the volunteer organization.

        ii. Release of an abstract of the driving record of a prospective volunteer requires a statement signed by: (A) The prospective volunteer that authorizes the release of the record; and (B) the volunteer organization attesting that the information is necessary for purposes related to driving by the individual at the direction of the volunteer organization. If the volunteer organization authorizes an agent to obtain this information on their behalf, this must be noted in the statement.

    d. Transit authorities. An abstract of the full driving record maintained by the department may be furnished to an employee or agents of a transit authority checking prospective or existing volunteer vanpool drivers for insurance and risk management needs.

    e. Insurance carriers. (i) An abstract of the driving record maintained by the department covering the period of not more than the last three years may be furnished to an insurance company or its agents:

(A) That has motor vehicle or life insurance in effect covering the named individual;

(B) To which the named individual has applied; or

(C) That has insurance in effect covering the employer or a prospective employer of the named individual.

        ii. The abstract provided to the insurance company must:

(A) Not contain any information related to actions committed by law enforcement officers or firefighters, as both terms are defined in RCW 41.26.030, or by Washington state patrol officers, while driving official vehicles in the performance of their occupational duty, or by registered tow truck operators as defined in RCW 46.55.010 in the performance of their occupational duties while at the scene of a roadside impound or recovery so long as they are not issued a citation. This does not apply to any situation where the vehicle was used in the commission of a misdemeanor or felony;

(B) Include convictions under RCW 46.61.5249 and 46.61.525, except that the abstract must report the convictions only as negligent driving without reference to whether they are for first or second degree negligent driving; and

(C) Exclude any deferred prosecution under RCW 10.05.060, except that if a person is removed from a deferred prosecution under RCW 10.05.090, the abstract must show the deferred prosecution as well as the removal.

        iii. Any policy of insurance may not be canceled, nonrenewed, denied, or have the rate increased on the basis of information regarding an accident included in the abstract of a driving record, unless the policyholder was determined to be at fault.

        iv. Any insurance company or its agents, for underwriting purposes relating to the operation of commercial motor vehicles, may not use any information contained in the abstract relative to any person's operation of motor vehicles while not engaged in such employment. Any insurance company or its agents, for underwriting purposes relating to the operation of noncommercial motor vehicles, may not use any information contained in the abstract relative to any person's operation of commercial motor vehicles. For the purposes of this subsection, "commercial motor vehicle" has the same meaning as in RCW 46.25.010(6).

    f. Alcohol/drug assessment or treatment agencies. An abstract of the driving record maintained by the department covering the period of not more than the last five years may be furnished to an alcohol/drug assessment or treatment agency approved by the department of health to which the named individual has applied or been assigned for evaluation or treatment, for purposes of assisting employees in making a determination as to what level of treatment, if any, is appropriate, except that the abstract must:

        i. Also include records of alcohol-related offenses, as defined in RCW 46.01.260(2), covering a period of not more than the last ten years; and

        ii. Indicate whether an alcohol-related offense was originally charged as a violation of either RCW 46.61.502 or 46.61.504.

    g. Attorneys—City attorneys, county prosecuting attorneys, and named individual's attorney of record. An abstract of the full driving record maintained by the department, including whether a recorded violation is an alcohol-related offense, as defined in RCW 46.01.260(2), that was originally charged as a violation of either RCW 46.61.502 or 46.61.504, may be furnished to city attorneys, county prosecuting attorneys, or the named individual's attorney of record. City attorneys, county prosecuting attorneys, or the named individual's attorney of record may provide the driving record to alcohol/drug assessment or treatment agencies approved by the department of social and health services to which the named individual has applied or been assigned for evaluation or treatment.

    h. State colleges, universities, or agencies, or units of local government. An abstract of the full driving record maintained by the department may be furnished to (i) state colleges, universities, or agencies for employment and risk management purposes or (ii) units of local government authorized to self-insure under RCW 48.62.031, or their agents, for employment and risk management purposes. "Unit of local government" includes an insurance pool established under RCW 48.62.031.

    i. Superintendent of public instruction. (i) An abstract of the full driving record maintained by the department may be furnished to the superintendent of public instruction for review of public school bus driver records. The superintendent or superintendent's designee may discuss information on the driving record with an authorized representative of the employing school district for employment and risk management purposes.

        ii. The superintendent of public instruction is exempt from paying the fees related to the reviewing of records and the fee required in subsection (5) of this section.

    j. State and federal agencies. An abstract of the driving record maintained by the department may be furnished to state and federal agencies, or their agents, in carrying out its functions.

    k. Transportation network companies. An abstract of the full driving record maintained by the department may be furnished to a transportation network company or its agents acting on its behalf of the named individual for purposes related to driving by the individual as a condition of being a contracted driver.

    l. Research. (i) The department may furnish driving record data to state agencies and bona fide scientific research organizations. The department may require review and approval by an institutional review board. For the purposes of this subsection, "research" means a planned and systematic sociological, psychological, epidemiological, biomedical, or other scientific investigation carried out by a state agency, or by a scientific research professional associated with a bona fide scientific research organization with an objective to contribute to scientific knowledge, the solution of social and health problems, or the evaluation of public benefit and service programs. This definition excludes methods of record analysis and data collection that are subjective, do not permit replication, and are not designed to yield reliable and valid results.

        ii. The state agency, or a scientific research professional associated with a bona fide scientific research organization, are exempt from paying the fees related to the reviewing of records and the fee required in subsection (5) of this section. However, the department may charge a cost-recovery fee for the actual cost of providing the data.

3. Reviewing of driving records. (a) In addition to the methods described herein, the director may enter into a contractual agreement for the purpose of reviewing the driving records of existing employees for changes to the record during specified periods of time. The department shall establish a fee for this service, which must be deposited in the highway safety fund. The fee for this service must be set at a level that does not result in a net revenue loss to the state. Any information provided under this subsection must be treated in the same manner and is subject to the same restrictions as driving record abstracts.

    b. The department may provide reviewing services to the following entities:

        i. Employers for existing employees, or their agents;

        ii. Transit authorities for current vanpool drivers, or their agents;

        iii. Insurance carriers for current policyholders, or their agents;

        iv. State colleges, universities, or agencies, or units of local government, or their agents;

    v. The office of the superintendent of public instruction for school bus drivers statewide; and

    vi. Transportation network companies, or their agents.

4. Release to third parties prohibited. (a) Any person or entity receiving an abstract of a person's driving record under subsection (2)(b) through (l) of this section shall use the abstract exclusively for his, her, or its own purposes or as otherwise expressly permitted under this section, and shall not divulge any information contained in the abstract to a third party.

    b. The following release of records to third parties are hereby authorized:

        i. Employers may divulge driving records to regulatory bodies, as defined by the department by rule, such as the United States department of transportation and the federal motor carrier safety administration.

        ii. Employers may divulge a three-year driving record to their insurance carrier for underwriting purposes.

        iii. Employers may divulge driving records to contracted motor carrier consultants for the purposes of ensuring driver compliance and risk management.

5. Fee. The director shall collect a thirteen dollar fee for each abstract of a person's driving record furnished by the department. Fifty percent of the fee must be deposited in the highway safety fund, and fifty percent of the fee must be deposited according to RCW 46.68.038.

6. Violation. (a) Any negligent violation of this section is a gross misdemeanor.

    b. Any intentional violation of this section is a class C felony.

7. Effective July 1, 2019, the contents of a driving abstract pursuant to this section shall not include any information related to sealed juvenile records unless that information is required by federal law or regulation.

\[ [2021 c 93 § 8](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/2021-22/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/Senate/5152-S.SL.pdf?cite=2021%20c%2093%20§%208); [2019 c 99 § 1](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/2019-20/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/House/1360-S.SL.pdf?cite=2019%20c%2099%20§%201); [2017 c 43 § 2](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/2017-18/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/Senate/5343-S.SL.pdf?cite=2017%20c%2043%20§%202); [2015 2nd sp.s. c 3 § 12](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/2015-16/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/House/1276-S2.SL.pdf?cite=2015%202nd%20sp.s.%20c%203%20§%2012); [2015 c 265 § 4](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/2015-16/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/Senate/5564-S2.SL.pdf?cite=2015%20c%20265%20§%204); [2012 c 74 § 6](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/2011-12/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/House/2660.SL.pdf?cite=2012%20c%2074%20§%206); [2012 c 73 § 1](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/2011-12/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/Senate/5246-S.SL.pdf?cite=2012%20c%2073%20§%201); [2010 c 253 § 1](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/2009-10/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/House/2939-S.SL.pdf?cite=2010%20c%20253%20§%201); [2009 c 276 § 1](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/2009-10/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/Senate/5610-S.SL.pdf?cite=2009%20c%20276%20§%201); [2008 c 253 § 1](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/2007-08/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/Senate/6885.SL.pdf?cite=2008%20c%20253%20§%201); [2007 c 424 § 3](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/2007-08/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/Senate/5937-S.SL.pdf?cite=2007%20c%20424%20§%203); [2004 c 49 § 1](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/2003-04/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/House/2830-S.SL.pdf?cite=2004%20c%2049%20§%201); [2003 c 367 § 1](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/2003-04/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/Senate/5868-S.SL.pdf?cite=2003%20c%20367%20§%201); prior:  2002 c 352 § 20; [2002 c 221 § 1](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/2001-02/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/House/2432-S.SL.pdf?cite=2002%20c%20221%20§%201); [2001 c 309 § 1](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/2001-02/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/House/1567.SL.pdf?cite=2001%20c%20309%20§%201); [1998 c 165 § 11](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/1997-98/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/House/2439-S.SL.pdf?cite=1998%20c%20165%20§%2011); [1997 c 66 § 12](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/1997-98/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/Senate/5060-S.SL.pdf?cite=1997%20c%2066%20§%2012); prior:  1996 c 307 § 4; [1996 c 183 § 2](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/1995-96/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/House/1964-S.SL.pdf?cite=1996%20c%20183%20§%202); [1994 c 275 § 16](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/1993-94/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/Senate/6047-S.SL.pdf?cite=1994%20c%20275%20§%2016); [1991 c 243 § 1](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/1991-92/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/House/1024.SL.pdf?cite=1991%20c%20243%20§%201); [1989 c 178 § 24](http://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1989c178.pdf?cite=1989%20c%20178%20§%2024); prior: 1987 1st ex.s c 9 § 2; [1987 c 397 § 2](http://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1987c397.pdf?cite=1987%20c%20397%20§%202); [1987 c 181 § 1](http://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1987c181.pdf?cite=1987%20c%20181%20§%201); [1986 c 74 § 1](http://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1986c74.pdf?cite=1986%20c%2074%20§%201); [1985 ex.s. c 1 § 11](http://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1985ex1c1.pdf?cite=1985%20ex.s.%20c%201%20§%2011); [1979 ex.s. c 136 § 84](http://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1979ex1c136.pdf?cite=1979%20ex.s.%20c%20136%20§%2084); [1977 ex.s. c 356 § 2](http://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1977ex1c356.pdf?cite=1977%20ex.s.%20c%20356%20§%202); [1977 ex.s. c 140 § 1](http://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1977ex1c140.pdf?cite=1977%20ex.s.%20c%20140%20§%201); [1973 1st ex.s. c 37 § 1](http://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1973ex1c37.pdf?cite=1973%201st%20ex.s.%20c%2037%20§%201); [1969 ex.s. c 40 § 3](http://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1969ex1c40.pdf?cite=1969%20ex.s.%20c%2040%20§%203); [1967 c 174 § 2](http://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1967c174.pdf?cite=1967%20c%20174%20§%202); [1967 c 32 § 63](http://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1967c32.pdf?cite=1967%20c%2032%20§%2063); [1963 c 169 § 65](http://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1963c169.pdf?cite=1963%20c%20169%20§%2065); [1961 ex.s. c 21 § 27](http://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1961ex1c21.pdf?cite=1961%20ex.s.%20c%2021%20§%2027); \]

