# 46.90 - Washington model traffic ordinance.
* [46.90.005 - Purpose.](#4690005---purpose)
* [46.90.010 - Adoption of model traffic ordinance—Amendments.](#4690010---adoption-of-model-traffic-ordinanceamendments)
## 46.90.005 - Purpose.
The purpose of this chapter is to encourage highway safety and uniform traffic laws by authorizing the department of licensing to adopt a comprehensive compilation of sound, uniform traffic laws to serve as a guide which local authorities may adopt by reference or any part thereof, including all future amendments or additions thereto. Any local authority which adopts that body of rules by reference may at any time exclude any section or sections of those rules that it does not desire to include in its local traffic ordinance. The rules are not intended to deny any local authority its legislative power, but rather to enhance safe and efficient movement of traffic throughout the state by having current, uniform traffic laws available.

\[ [1993 c 400 § 1](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/1993-94/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/House/1103-S.SL.pdf?cite=1993%20c%20400%20§%201); [1975 1st ex.s. c 54 § 1](http://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1975ex1c54.pdf?cite=1975%201st%20ex.s.%20c%2054%20§%201); \]

## 46.90.010 - Adoption of model traffic ordinance—Amendments.
In consultation with the chief of the Washington state patrol and the traffic safety commission, the director shall adopt in accordance with chapter 34.05 RCW a model traffic ordinance for use by any city, town, or county. The addition of any new section to, or amendment or repeal of any section in, the model traffic ordinance is deemed to amend any city, town, or county, ordinance which has adopted by reference the model traffic ordinance or any part thereof, and it shall not be necessary for the legislative authority of any city, town, or county to take any action with respect to such addition, amendment, or repeal notwithstanding the provisions of RCW 35.21.180, 35A.12.140, 35A.13.180, and 36.32.120(7).

\[ [1993 c 400 § 2](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/1993-94/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/House/1103-S.SL.pdf?cite=1993%20c%20400%20§%202); [1975 1st ex.s. c 54 § 2](http://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1975ex1c54.pdf?cite=1975%201st%20ex.s.%20c%2054%20§%202); \]

