# 43.21C - State environmental policy.
* [43.21C.010 - Purposes.](#4321c010---purposes)
* [43.21C.020 - Legislative recognitions—Declaration—Responsibility.](#4321c020---legislative-recognitionsdeclarationresponsibility)
* [43.21C.030 - Guidelines for state agencies, local governments—Statements—Reports—Advice—Information.](#4321c030---guidelines-for-state-agencies-local-governmentsstatementsreportsadviceinformation)
* [43.21C.0301 - Decisions not subject to RCW  43.21C.030.](#4321c0301---decisions-not-subject-to-rcw--4321c030)
* [43.21C.031 - Significant impacts.](#4321c031---significant-impacts)
* [43.21C.0311 - Final environmental impact statements—Expeditious manner—Time limit—Reports.](#4321c0311---final-environmental-impact-statementsexpeditious-mannertime-limitreports)
* [43.21C.033 - Threshold determination to be made within ninety days after application is complete.](#4321c033---threshold-determination-to-be-made-within-ninety-days-after-application-is-complete)
* [43.21C.034 - Use of existing documents.](#4321c034---use-of-existing-documents)
* [43.21C.035 - Certain irrigation projects decisions exempt from RCW  43.21C.030(2)(c).](#4321c035---certain-irrigation-projects-decisions-exempt-from-rcw--4321c0302c)
* [43.21C.036 - Hazardous substance remedial actions—Procedural requirements and documents to be integrated.](#4321c036---hazardous-substance-remedial-actionsprocedural-requirements-and-documents-to-be-integrated)
* [43.21C.037 - Application of RCW  43.21C.030(2)(c) to forest practices.](#4321c037---application-of-rcw--4321c0302c-to-forest-practices)
* [43.21C.038 - Application of RCW  43.21C.030(2)(c) to school closures.](#4321c038---application-of-rcw--4321c0302c-to-school-closures)
* [43.21C.0381 - Application of RCW  43.21C.030(2)(c) to decisions pertaining to air operating permits.](#4321c0381---application-of-rcw--4321c0302c-to-decisions-pertaining-to-air-operating-permits)
* [43.21C.0382 - Application of RCW  43.21C.030(2)(c) to watershed restoration projects—Fish habitat enhancement projects.](#4321c0382---application-of-rcw--4321c0302c-to-watershed-restoration-projectsfish-habitat-enhancement-projects)
* [43.21C.0383 - Application of RCW  43.21C.030(2)(c) to waste discharge permits.](#4321c0383---application-of-rcw--4321c0302c-to-waste-discharge-permits)
* [43.21C.0384 - Application of RCW  43.21C.030(2)(c) to wireless services facilities—Reporting requirement—Definitions.](#4321c0384---application-of-rcw--4321c0302c-to-wireless-services-facilitiesreporting-requirementdefinitions)
* [43.21C.039 - Metals mining and milling operations—Environmental impact statements required.](#4321c039---metals-mining-and-milling-operationsenvironmental-impact-statements-required)
* [43.21C.040 - Examination of laws, regulations, policies by state agencies and local authorities—Report of deficiencies and corrective measures.](#4321c040---examination-of-laws-regulations-policies-by-state-agencies-and-local-authoritiesreport-of-deficiencies-and-corrective-measures)
* [43.21C.050 - Specific statutory obligations not affected.](#4321c050---specific-statutory-obligations-not-affected)
* [43.21C.060 - Chapter supplementary—Conditioning or denial of governmental action.](#4321c060---chapter-supplementaryconditioning-or-denial-of-governmental-action)
* [43.21C.065 - Impact fees and fees for system improvements.](#4321c065---impact-fees-and-fees-for-system-improvements)
* [43.21C.075 - Appeals.](#4321c075---appeals)
* [43.21C.080 - Notice of action by governmental agency—How publicized—Time limitation for commencing challenge to action.](#4321c080---notice-of-action-by-governmental-agencyhow-publicizedtime-limitation-for-commencing-challenge-to-action)
* [43.21C.087 - List of filings required by RCW  43.21C.080.](#4321c087---list-of-filings-required-by-rcw--4321c080)
* [43.21C.090 - Decision of governmental agency to be accorded substantial weight.](#4321c090---decision-of-governmental-agency-to-be-accorded-substantial-weight)
* [43.21C.095 - State environmental policy act rules to be accorded substantial deference.](#4321c095---state-environmental-policy-act-rules-to-be-accorded-substantial-deference)
* [43.21C.110 - Content of state environmental policy act rules.](#4321c110---content-of-state-environmental-policy-act-rules)
* [43.21C.120 - Rules, ordinances, resolutions and regulations—Adoption—Effective dates.](#4321c120---rules-ordinances-resolutions-and-regulationsadoptioneffective-dates)
* [43.21C.130 - Model ordinances.](#4321c130---model-ordinances)
* [43.21C.135 - Authority of local governmental units to adopt rules, guidelines and model ordinances by reference.](#4321c135---authority-of-local-governmental-units-to-adopt-rules-guidelines-and-model-ordinances-by-reference)
* [43.21C.150 - RCW  43.21C.030(2)(c) inapplicable when statement previously prepared pursuant to national environmental policy act.](#4321c150---rcw--4321c0302c-inapplicable-when-statement-previously-prepared-pursuant-to-national-environmental-policy-act)
* [43.21C.160 - Utilization of statement prepared under RCW  43.21C.030 to implement *chapter  90.62 RCW—Utilization of *chapter  90.62 RCW procedures to satisfy RCW  43.21C.030(2)(c).](#4321c160---utilization-of-statement-prepared-under-rcw--4321c030-to-implement-chapter--9062-rcwutilization-of-chapter--9062-rcw-procedures-to-satisfy-rcw--4321c0302c)
* [43.21C.170 - Council on environmental policy.](#4321c170---council-on-environmental-policy)
* [43.21C.175 - Council on environmental policy—Personnel.](#4321c175---council-on-environmental-policypersonnel)
* [43.21C.210 - Certain actions during state of emergency exempt from chapter.](#4321c210---certain-actions-during-state-of-emergency-exempt-from-chapter)
* [43.21C.220 - Incorporation of city or town exempt from chapter.](#4321c220---incorporation-of-city-or-town-exempt-from-chapter)
* [43.21C.222 - Annexation by city or town exempt from chapter.](#4321c222---annexation-by-city-or-town-exempt-from-chapter)
* [43.21C.225 - Consolidation and annexation of cities and towns exempt from chapter.](#4321c225---consolidation-and-annexation-of-cities-and-towns-exempt-from-chapter)
* [43.21C.227 - Disincorporation of a city or town or reduction of city or town limits exempt from chapter.](#4321c227---disincorporation-of-a-city-or-town-or-reduction-of-city-or-town-limits-exempt-from-chapter)
* [43.21C.229 - Infill development—Categorical exemptions from chapter.](#4321c229---infill-developmentcategorical-exemptions-from-chapter)
* [43.21C.230 - Development and adoption of plan under chapter  43.180 RCW exempt from chapter.](#4321c230---development-and-adoption-of-plan-under-chapter--43180-rcw-exempt-from-chapter)
* [43.21C.240 - Project review under the growth management act.](#4321c240---project-review-under-the-growth-management-act)
* [43.21C.250 - Forest practices board—Emergency rules—Exempt from chapter.](#4321c250---forest-practices-boardemergency-rulesexempt-from-chapter)
* [43.21C.260 - Certain actions not subject to RCW  43.21C.030(2)(c)—Threshold determination on a watershed analysis.](#4321c260---certain-actions-not-subject-to-rcw--4321c0302cthreshold-determination-on-a-watershed-analysis)
* [43.21C.300 - Workshops—Handbook.](#4321c300---workshopshandbook)
* [43.21C.400 - Unfinished nuclear power projects—Council action exempt from this chapter.](#4321c400---unfinished-nuclear-power-projectscouncil-action-exempt-from-this-chapter)
* [43.21C.410 - Battery charging and exchange station installation.](#4321c410---battery-charging-and-exchange-station-installation)
* [43.21C.420 - Comprehensive plans and development regulations—Optional elements—Nonproject environmental impact statements—Subarea plans—Transfer of development rights program—Recovery of expenses.](#4321c420---comprehensive-plans-and-development-regulationsoptional-elementsnonproject-environmental-impact-statementssubarea-planstransfer-of-development-rights-programrecovery-of-expenses)
* [43.21C.428 - Recovery of expenses of nonproject environmental impact statements—Fees for subsequent development.](#4321c428---recovery-of-expenses-of-nonproject-environmental-impact-statementsfees-for-subsequent-development)
* [43.21C.430 - Certain fish protection standards exempt from compliance with chapter.](#4321c430---certain-fish-protection-standards-exempt-from-compliance-with-chapter)
* [43.21C.440 - Planned action—Defined—Authority of a county, city, or town—Community meetings.](#4321c440---planned-actiondefinedauthority-of-a-county-city-or-towncommunity-meetings)
* [43.21C.450 - Nonproject actions exempt from requirements of chapter.](#4321c450---nonproject-actions-exempt-from-requirements-of-chapter)
* [43.21C.460 - Environmental checklist—Authority of lead agency—Limitations of section.](#4321c460---environmental-checklistauthority-of-lead-agencylimitations-of-section)
* [43.21C.470 - Categorical exemption for structurally deficient bridges—Definition.](#4321c470---categorical-exemption-for-structurally-deficient-bridgesdefinition)
* [43.21C.480 - Repair or replacement of structurally deficient state bridges exempt from chapter.](#4321c480---repair-or-replacement-of-structurally-deficient-state-bridges-exempt-from-chapter)
* [43.21C.490 - Formation of community facilities districts exempt from this chapter.](#4321c490---formation-of-community-facilities-districts-exempt-from-this-chapter)
* [43.21C.495 - Amendments to development regulations and other nonproject actions taken by a city to implement RCW  36.70A.600 not subject to administrative or judicial appeals.](#4321c495---amendments-to-development-regulations-and-other-nonproject-actions-taken-by-a-city-to-implement-rcw--3670a600-not-subject-to-administrative-or-judicial-appeals)
* [43.21C.501 - Certain project actions evaluated under this chapter by a city or town planning under RCW  36.70A.040—When exempt from appeals under this chapter.](#4321c501---certain-project-actions-evaluated-under-this-chapter-by-a-city-or-town-planning-under-rcw--3670a040when-exempt-from-appeals-under-this-chapter)
* [43.21C.515 - Projects permitted pursuant to RCW  77.55.480—Not subject to RCW  43.21C.030(2). (Expires June 30, 2025.)](#4321c515---projects-permitted-pursuant-to-rcw--7755480not-subject-to-rcw--4321c0302-expires-june-30-2025)
* [43.21C.520 - Review of greenhouse gas emissions from a new or expanded facility.](#4321c520---review-of-greenhouse-gas-emissions-from-a-new-or-expanded-facility)
* [43.21C.900 - Short title.](#4321c900---short-title)
* [43.21C.911 - Section headings not part of law—1983 c 117.](#4321c911---section-headings-not-part-of-law1983-c-117)
* [43.21C.912 - Applicability—1983 c 117.](#4321c912---applicability1983-c-117)
* [43.21C.914 - Effective dates—1983 c 117.](#4321c914---effective-dates1983-c-117)
## 43.21C.010 - Purposes.
The purposes of this chapter are: (1) To declare a state policy which will encourage productive and enjoyable harmony between humankind and the environment; (2) to promote efforts which will prevent or eliminate damage to the environment and biosphere; (3) and [to] stimulate the health and welfare of human beings; and (4) to enrich the understanding of the ecological systems and natural resources important to the state and nation.

\[ [2009 c 549 § 5095](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/2009-10/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/Senate/5038.SL.pdf?cite=2009%20c%20549%20§%205095); [1971 ex.s. c 109 § 1](http://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1971ex1c109.pdf?cite=1971%20ex.s.%20c%20109%20§%201); \]

## 43.21C.020 - Legislative recognitions—Declaration—Responsibility.
1. The legislature, recognizing that a human being depends on biological and physical surroundings for food, shelter, and other needs, and for cultural enrichment as well; and recognizing further the profound impact of a human being's activity on the interrelations of all components of the natural environment, particularly the profound influences of population growth, high-density urbanization, industrial expansion, resource utilization and exploitation, and new and expanding technological advances and recognizing further the critical importance of restoring and maintaining environmental quality to the overall welfare and development of human beings, declares that it is the continuing policy of the state of Washington, in cooperation with federal and local governments, and other concerned public and private organizations, to use all practicable means and measures, including financial and technical assistance, in a manner calculated to: (a) Foster and promote the general welfare; (b) create and maintain conditions under which human beings and nature can exist in productive harmony; and (c) fulfill the social, economic, and other requirements of present and future generations of Washington citizens.

2. In order to carry out the policy set forth in this chapter, it is the continuing responsibility of the state of Washington and all agencies of the state to use all practicable means, consistent with other essential considerations of state policy, to improve and coordinate plans, functions, programs, and resources to the end that the state and its citizens may:

   a. Fulfill the responsibilities of each generation as trustee of the environment for succeeding generations;

   b. Assure for all people of Washington safe, healthful, productive, and aesthetically and culturally pleasing surroundings;

   c. Attain the widest range of beneficial uses of the environment without degradation, risk to health or safety, or other undesirable and unintended consequences;

   d. Preserve important historic, cultural, and natural aspects of our national heritage;

   e. Maintain, wherever possible, an environment which supports diversity and variety of individual choice;

   f. Achieve a balance between population and resource use which will permit high standards of living and a wide sharing of life's amenities; and

   g. Enhance the quality of renewable resources and approach the maximum attainable recycling of depletable resources.

3. The legislature recognizes that each person has a fundamental and inalienable right to a healthful environment and that each person has a responsibility to contribute to the preservation and enhancement of the environment.

\[ [2009 c 549 § 5096](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/2009-10/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/Senate/5038.SL.pdf?cite=2009%20c%20549%20§%205096); [1971 ex.s. c 109 § 2](http://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1971ex1c109.pdf?cite=1971%20ex.s.%20c%20109%20§%202); \]

## 43.21C.030 - Guidelines for state agencies, local governments—Statements—Reports—Advice—Information.
The legislature authorizes and directs that, to the fullest extent possible: (1) The policies, regulations, and laws of the state of Washington shall be interpreted and administered in accordance with the policies set forth in this chapter, and (2) all branches of government of this state, including state agencies, municipal and public corporations, and counties shall:

a. Utilize a systematic, interdisciplinary approach which will insure the integrated use of the natural and social sciences and the environmental design arts in planning and in decision making which may have an impact on the environment;

   b. Identify and develop methods and procedures, in consultation with the department of ecology and the ecological commission, which will insure that presently unquantified environmental amenities and values will be given appropriate consideration in decision making along with economic and technical considerations;

   c. Include in every recommendation or report on proposals for legislation and other major actions significantly affecting the quality of the environment, a detailed statement by the responsible official on:

      i. the environmental impact of the proposed action;

      ii. any adverse environmental effects which cannot be avoided should the proposal be implemented;

      iii. alternatives to the proposed action;

      iv. the relationship between local short-term uses of the environment and the maintenance and enhancement of long-term productivity; and

      v. any irreversible and irretrievable commitments of resources which would be involved in the proposed action should it be implemented;

   d. Prior to making any detailed statement, the responsible official shall consult with and obtain the comments of any public agency which has jurisdiction by law or special expertise with respect to any environmental impact involved. Copies of such statement and the comments and views of the appropriate federal, province, state, and local agencies, which are authorized to develop and enforce environmental standards, shall be made available to the governor, the department of ecology, the ecological commission, and the public, and shall accompany the proposal through the existing agency review processes;

   e. Study, develop, and describe appropriate alternatives to recommended courses of action in any proposal which involves unresolved conflicts concerning alternative uses of available resources;

   f. Recognize the worldwide and long-range character of environmental problems and, where consistent with state policy, lend appropriate support to initiatives, resolutions, and programs designed to maximize international cooperation in anticipating and preventing a decline in the quality of the world environment;

   g. Make available to the federal government, other states, provinces of Canada, municipalities, institutions, and individuals, advice and information useful in restoring, maintaining, and enhancing the quality of the environment;

   h. Initiate and utilize ecological information in the planning and development of natural resource-oriented projects.

\[ [2010 c 8 § 7002](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/2009-10/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/Senate/6239-S.SL.pdf?cite=2010%20c%208%20§%207002); [1971 ex.s. c 109 § 3](http://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1971ex1c109.pdf?cite=1971%20ex.s.%20c%20109%20§%203); \]

## 43.21C.0301 - Decisions not subject to RCW  43.21C.030.
1. Decisions made under RCW 36.70A.720 pertaining to work plans, as defined in RCW 36.70A.703, are not subject to the requirements of RCW 43.21C.030(2)(c).

2. Decisions made by a county under RCW 36.70A.710 on whether to participate in the voluntary stewardship program established by RCW 36.70A.705 are not subject to the requirements of RCW 43.21C.030(2)(c).

\[ [2011 c 360 § 19](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/2011-12/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/House/1886-S.SL.pdf?cite=2011%20c%20360%20§%2019); \]

## 43.21C.031 - Significant impacts.
1. An environmental impact statement (the detailed statement required by RCW 43.21C.030(2)(c)) shall be prepared on proposals for legislation and other major actions having a probable significant, adverse environmental impact. The environmental impact statement may be combined with the recommendation or report on the proposal or issued as a separate document. The substantive decisions or recommendations shall be clearly identifiable in the combined document. Actions categorically exempt under RCW 43.21C.110(1)(a) and 43.21C.450 do not require environmental review or the preparation of an environmental impact statement under this chapter. 

2. An environmental impact statement is required to analyze only those probable adverse environmental impacts which are significant. Beneficial environmental impacts may be discussed. The responsible official shall consult with agencies and the public to identify such impacts and limit the scope of an environmental impact statement. The subjects listed in RCW 43.21C.030(2)(c) need not be treated as separate sections of an environmental impact statement. Discussions of significant short-term and long-term environmental impacts, significant irrevocable commitments of natural resources, significant alternatives including mitigation measures, and significant environmental impacts which cannot be mitigated should be consolidated or included, as applicable, in those sections of an environmental impact statement where the responsible official decides they logically belong.

\[ [2012 1st sp.s. c 1 § 302](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/2011-12/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/Senate/6406-S.SL.pdf?cite=2012%201st%20sp.s.%20c%201%20§%20302); [1995 c 347 § 203](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/1995-96/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/House/1724-S.SL.pdf?cite=1995%20c%20347%20§%20203); [1983 c 117 § 1](http://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1983c117.pdf?cite=1983%20c%20117%20§%201); \]

## 43.21C.0311 - Final environmental impact statements—Expeditious manner—Time limit—Reports.
1. A lead agency shall aspire to prepare a final environmental impact statement required by RCW 43.21C.030(2) in as expeditious a manner as possible while not compromising the integrity of the analysis.

   a. For even the most complex government decisions associated with a broad scope of possible environmental impacts, a lead agency shall aspire to prepare a final environmental impact statement required by RCW 43.21C.030(2) within twenty-four months of a threshold determination of a probable significant, adverse environmental impact.

   b. Wherever possible, a lead agency shall aspire to far outpace the twenty-four month time limit established in this section for more commonplace government decisions associated with narrower and more easily identifiable environmental impacts.

2. Beginning December 31, 2018, and every two years thereafter, the department of ecology must submit a report on the environmental impact statements produced by state agencies and local governments to the appropriate committees of the legislature. The report must include data on the average time, and document the range of time, it took to complete environmental impact statements within the previous two years.

3. Nothing in this section creates any civil liability for a lead agency or creates a new cause of action against a lead agency.

\[ [2017 c 289 § 2](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/2017-18/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/House/1086-S.SL.pdf?cite=2017%20c%20289%20§%202); \]

## 43.21C.033 - Threshold determination to be made within ninety days after application is complete.
1. Except as provided in subsection (2) of this section, the responsible official shall make a threshold determination on a completed application within ninety days after the application and supporting documentation are complete. The applicant may request an additional thirty days for the threshold determination. The governmental entity responsible for making the threshold determination shall by rule, resolution, or ordinance adopt standards, consistent with rules adopted by the department to implement this chapter, for determining when an application and supporting documentation are complete.

2. This section shall not apply to a city, town, or county that:

   a. By ordinance adopted prior to April 1, 1992, has adopted procedures to integrate permit and land use decisions with the requirements of this chapter; or

   b. Is planning under RCW 36.70A.040 and is subject to the requirements of *RCW 36.70B.090.

\[ [1995 c 347 § 422](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/1995-96/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/House/1724-S.SL.pdf?cite=1995%20c%20347%20§%20422); [1992 c 208 § 1](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/1991-92/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/Senate/5728-S.SL.pdf?cite=1992%20c%20208%20§%201); \]

## 43.21C.034 - Use of existing documents.
Lead agencies are authorized to use in whole or in part existing environmental documents for new project or nonproject actions, if the documents adequately address environmental considerations set forth in RCW 43.21C.030. The prior proposal or action and the new proposal or action need not be identical, but must have similar elements that provide a basis for comparing their environmental consequences such as timing, types of impacts, alternatives, or geography. The lead agency shall independently review the content of the existing documents and determine that the information and analysis to be used is relevant and adequate. If necessary, the lead agency may require additional documentation to ensure that all environmental impacts have been adequately addressed.

\[ [1993 c 23 § 1](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/1993-94/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/Senate/5802-S.SL.pdf?cite=1993%20c%2023%20§%201); \]

## 43.21C.035 - Certain irrigation projects decisions exempt from RCW  43.21C.030(2)(c).
Decisions pertaining to applications for appropriation of fifty cubic feet of water per second or less for irrigation projects promulgated by any person, private firm, private corporation or private association without resort to subsidy by either state or federal government pursuant to RCW 90.03.250 through 90.03.340, as now or hereafter amended, to be used for agricultural irrigation shall not be subject to the requirements of RCW 43.21C.030(2)(c), as now or hereafter amended.

\[ [1974 ex.s. c 150 § 1](http://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1974ex1c150.pdf?cite=1974%20ex.s.%20c%20150%20§%201); \]

## 43.21C.036 - Hazardous substance remedial actions—Procedural requirements and documents to be integrated.
In conducting a remedial action at a facility pursuant to a consent decree, order, or agreed order issued pursuant to chapter 70A.305 RCW, or if conducted by the department of ecology, the department of ecology to the maximum extent practicable shall integrate the procedural requirements and documents of this chapter with the procedures and documents under chapter 70A.305 RCW. Such integration shall at a minimum include the public participation procedures of chapter 70A.305 RCW and the public notice and review requirements of this chapter.

\[ [2020 c 20 § 1039](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/2019-20/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/House/2246-S.SL.pdf?cite=2020%20c%2020%20§%201039); [1994 c 257 § 21](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/1993-94/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/Senate/6339-S.SL.pdf?cite=1994%20c%20257%20§%2021); \]

## 43.21C.037 - Application of RCW  43.21C.030(2)(c) to forest practices.
1. Decisions pertaining to applications for Class I, II, and III forest practices, as defined by rule of the forest practices board under RCW 76.09.050, are not subject to the requirements of RCW 43.21C.030(2)(c) as now or hereafter amended.

2. When the applicable county, city, or town requires a license in connection with any proposal involving forest practices:

   a. On forestlands that are being converted to another use; or

   b. On lands which, pursuant to RCW 76.09.070 as now or hereafter amended, are not to be reforested because of the likelihood of future conversion to urban development, then the local government, rather than the department of natural resources, is responsible for any detailed statement required under RCW 43.21C.030(2)(c).

3. Those forest practices determined by rule of the forest practices board to have a potential for a substantial impact on the environment, and thus to be Class IV practices, require an evaluation by the department of natural resources as to whether or not a detailed statement must be prepared pursuant to this chapter. The evaluation shall be made within ten days from the date the department receives the application. A Class IV forest practice application must be approved or disapproved by the department within thirty calendar days from the date the department receives the application, unless the department determines that a detailed statement must be made, in which case the application must be approved or disapproved by the department within sixty days from the date the department receives the application, unless the commissioner of public lands, through the promulgation of a formal order, determines that the process cannot be completed within such period. This section shall not be construed to prevent any local or regional governmental entity from determining that a detailed statement must be prepared for an action regarding a Class IV forest practice taken by that governmental entity concerning the land on which forest practices will be conducted.

\[ [2011 c 207 § 3](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/2011-12/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/House/1582.SL.pdf?cite=2011%20c%20207%20§%203); [1997 c 173 § 6](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/1997-98/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/Senate/5714-S.SL.pdf?cite=1997%20c%20173%20§%206); [1983 c 117 § 2](http://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1983c117.pdf?cite=1983%20c%20117%20§%202); [1981 c 290 § 1](http://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1981c290.pdf?cite=1981%20c%20290%20§%201); \]

## 43.21C.038 - Application of RCW  43.21C.030(2)(c) to school closures.
Nothing in RCW 43.21C.030(2)(c) shall be construed to require the preparation of an environmental impact statement or the making of a threshold determination for any decision or any action commenced subsequent to September 1, 1982, pertaining to a plan, program, or decision for the closure of a school or schools or for the school closure portion of any broader policy, plan or program by a school district board of directors.

\[ [1983 c 109 § 1](http://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1983c109.pdf?cite=1983%20c%20109%20§%201); \]

## 43.21C.0381 - Application of RCW  43.21C.030(2)(c) to decisions pertaining to air operating permits.
Decisions pertaining to the issuance, renewal, reopening, or revision of an air operating permit under RCW 70A.15.2260 are not subject to the requirements of RCW 43.21C.030(2)(c).

\[ [2020 c 20 § 1040](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/2019-20/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/House/2246-S.SL.pdf?cite=2020%20c%2020%20§%201040); [1995 c 172 § 1](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/1995-96/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/House/1220-S.SL.pdf?cite=1995%20c%20172%20§%201); \]

## 43.21C.0382 - Application of RCW  43.21C.030(2)(c) to watershed restoration projects—Fish habitat enhancement projects.
1. Decisions pertaining to watershed restoration projects as defined in RCW 89.08.460 are not subject to the requirements of RCW 43.21C.030(2)(c).

2. Decisions pertaining to fish habitat enhancement projects meeting the criteria of RCW 77.55.181 and being reviewed and approved according to the provisions of RCW 77.55.181 are not subject to the requirements of RCW 43.21C.030(2)(c).

\[ [2014 c 120 § 16](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/2013-14/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/House/2251-S2.SL.pdf?cite=2014%20c%20120%20§%2016); [2003 c 39 § 23](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/2003-04/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/Senate/5172.SL.pdf?cite=2003%20c%2039%20§%2023); [1998 c 249 § 12](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/1997-98/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/House/2879-S2.SL.pdf?cite=1998%20c%20249%20§%2012); [1995 c 378 § 12](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/1995-96/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/Senate/5616-S.SL.pdf?cite=1995%20c%20378%20§%2012); \]

## 43.21C.0383 - Application of RCW  43.21C.030(2)(c) to waste discharge permits.
The following waste discharge permit actions are not subject to the requirements of RCW 43.21C.030(2)(c):

1. For existing discharges, the issuance, reissuance, or modification of a waste discharge permit that contains conditions no less stringent than federal effluent limitations and state rules;

2. The issuance of a construction stormwater general permit under chapter 90.48 RCW for a proposal disturbing less than five acres. The exemption in this subsection does not apply if, under rules adopted by the department of ecology, the proposal would otherwise be subject to the requirements of RCW 43.21C.030(2)(c).

\[ [2008 c 37 § 2](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/2007-08/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/Senate/6504.SL.pdf?cite=2008%20c%2037%20§%202); [1996 c 322 § 1](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/1995-96/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/House/2716.SL.pdf?cite=1996%20c%20322%20§%201); \]

## **43.21C.0384 - Application of RCW  43.21C.030(2)(c) to wireless services facilities—Reporting requirement—Definitions.**
1. Decisions pertaining to applications to site wireless service facilities are not subject to the requirements of RCW 43.21C.030(2)(c), if those facilities meet the following requirements:

    a. The collocation of new equipment, removal of equipment, or replacement of existing equipment on existing or replacement structures does not substantially change the physical dimensions of such structures; or

    b. The siting project involves constructing a wireless service tower  that is located in a commercial, industrial, manufacturing, forest, or agricultural zone. **The** exemption **in this subsection (1)(b)** does not apply to projects within a designated critical area.

2. The exemption**s** authorized under subsection (1) of this section may only be applied to a project consisting of a series of actions when all actions in the series are categorically exempt and the actions together do not have a probable significant adverse environmental impact.

3. The department of ecology shall adopt rules to create a categorical exemption for wireless service facilities that meet the conditions set forth in subsections (1) and (2) of this section.

4.

The definitions in this subsection apply throughout this section unless the context clearly requires otherwise.

    a. "Collocation" means the mounting or installation of equipment on an existing tower, building, or structure for the purpose of either transmitting or receiving, or both, radio frequency signals for communications purposes.

    b. "Existing structure" means any existing tower, pole, building, or other structure capable of supporting wireless service facilities.

    c. "Substantially change the physical dimensions" means:

        i. The mounting of equipment on a structure that would increase the height of the structure by more than ten percent, or twenty feet, whichever is greater; or

        ii. The mounting of equipment that would involve adding an appurtenance to the body of the structure that would protrude from the edge of the structure more than twenty feet, or more than the width of the structure at the level of the appurtenance, whichever is greater.

    d. "Wireless service facilities" means facilities for the provision of wireless services.

    e. "Wireless services" means wireless data and telecommunications services, including commercial mobile services, commercial mobile data services, unlicensed wireless services, and common carrier wireless exchange access services, as defined by federal laws and regulations.

## 43.21C.039 - Metals mining and milling operations—Environmental impact statements required.
Notwithstanding any provision in RCW 43.21C.030 and 43.21C.031 to the contrary, an environmental impact statement shall be prepared for any proposed metals mining and milling operation as required by RCW 78.56.050.

\[ [1994 c 232 § 25](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/1993-94/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/House/2521-S.SL.pdf?cite=1994%20c%20232%20§%2025); \]

## 43.21C.040 - Examination of laws, regulations, policies by state agencies and local authorities—Report of deficiencies and corrective measures.
All branches of government of this state, including state agencies, municipal and public corporations, and counties shall review their present statutory authority, administrative regulations, and current policies and procedures for the purpose of determining whether there are any deficiencies or inconsistencies therein which prohibit full compliance with the purposes and provisions of this chapter and shall propose to the governor not later than January 1, 1972, such measures as may be necessary to bring their authority and policies in conformity with the intent, purposes, and procedures set forth in this chapter.

\[ [1971 ex.s. c 109 § 4](http://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1971ex1c109.pdf?cite=1971%20ex.s.%20c%20109%20§%204); \]

## 43.21C.050 - Specific statutory obligations not affected.
Nothing in RCW 43.21C.030 or 43.21C.040 shall in any way affect the specific statutory obligations of any agency (1) to comply with criteria or standards of environmental quality, (2) to coordinate or consult with any other public agency, or (3) to act, or refrain from acting contingent upon the recommendations or certification of any other public agency.

\[ [1971 ex.s. c 109 § 5](http://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1971ex1c109.pdf?cite=1971%20ex.s.%20c%20109%20§%205); \]

## 43.21C.060 - Chapter supplementary—Conditioning or denial of governmental action.
The policies and goals set forth in this chapter are supplementary to those set forth in existing authorizations of all branches of government of this state, including state agencies, municipal and public corporations, and counties. Any governmental action may be conditioned or denied pursuant to this chapter: PROVIDED, That such conditions or denials shall be based upon policies identified by the appropriate governmental authority and incorporated into regulations, plans, or codes which are formally designated by the agency (or appropriate legislative body, in the case of local government) as possible bases for the exercise of authority pursuant to this chapter. Such designation shall occur at the time specified by RCW 43.21C.120. Such action may be conditioned only to mitigate specific adverse environmental impacts which are identified in the environmental documents prepared under this chapter. These conditions shall be stated in writing by the decision maker. Mitigation measures shall be reasonable and capable of being accomplished. In order to deny a proposal under this chapter, an agency must find that: (1) The proposal would result in significant adverse impacts identified in a final or supplemental environmental impact statement prepared under this chapter; and (2) reasonable mitigation measures are insufficient to mitigate the identified impact. Except for permits and variances issued pursuant to chapter 90.58 RCW, when such a governmental action, not requiring a legislative decision, is conditioned or denied by a nonelected official of a local governmental agency, the decision shall be appealable to the legislative authority of the acting local governmental agency unless that legislative authority formally eliminates such appeals. Such appeals shall be in accordance with procedures established for such appeals by the legislative authority of the acting local governmental agency.

\[ [1983 c 117 § 3](http://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1983c117.pdf?cite=1983%20c%20117%20§%203); [1977 ex.s. c 278 § 2](http://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1977ex1c278.pdf?cite=1977%20ex.s.%20c%20278%20§%202); [1971 ex.s. c 109 § 6](http://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1971ex1c109.pdf?cite=1971%20ex.s.%20c%20109%20§%206); \]

## 43.21C.065 - Impact fees and fees for system improvements.
A person required to pay an impact fee for system improvements pursuant to RCW 82.02.050 through 82.02.090 shall not be required to pay a fee pursuant to RCW 43.21C.060 for those same system improvements.

\[ [1992 c 219 § 1](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/1991-92/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/House/2842-S.SL.pdf?cite=1992%20c%20219%20§%201); \]

## 43.21C.075 - Appeals.
1. Because a major purpose of this chapter is to combine environmental considerations with public decisions, any appeal brought under this chapter shall be linked to a specific governmental action. The State Environmental Policy Act provides a basis for challenging whether governmental action is in compliance with the substantive and procedural provisions of this chapter. The State Environmental Policy Act is not intended to create a cause of action unrelated to a specific governmental action.

2. Unless otherwise provided by this section:

   a. Appeals under this chapter shall be of the governmental action together with its accompanying environmental determinations.

   b. Appeals of environmental determinations made (or lacking) under this chapter shall be commenced within the time required to appeal the governmental action which is subject to environmental review.

3. If an agency has a procedure for appeals of agency environmental determinations made under this chapter, such procedure:

   a. Shall allow no more than one agency appeal proceeding on each procedural determination (the adequacy of a determination of significance/nonsignificance or of a final environmental impact statement);

   b. Shall consolidate an appeal of procedural issues and of substantive determinations made under this chapter (such as a decision to require particular mitigation measures or to deny a proposal) with a hearing or appeal on the underlying governmental action by providing for a single simultaneous hearing before one hearing officer or body to consider the agency decision or recommendation on a proposal and any environmental determinations made under this chapter, with the exception of:

      i. An appeal of a determination of significance;

      ii. An appeal of a procedural determination made by an agency when the agency is a project proponent, or is funding a project, and chooses to conduct its review under this chapter, including any appeals of its procedural determinations, prior to submitting an application for a project permit;

      iii. An appeal of a procedural determination made by an agency on a nonproject action; or

      iv. An appeal to the local legislative authority under RCW 43.21C.060 or other applicable state statutes;

   c. Shall provide for the preparation of a record for use in any subsequent appeal proceedings, and shall provide for any subsequent appeal proceedings to be conducted on the record, consistent with other applicable law. An adequate record consists of findings and conclusions, testimony under oath, and taped or written transcript. An electronically recorded transcript will suffice for purposes of review under this subsection; and

   d. Shall provide that procedural determinations made by the responsible official shall be entitled to substantial weight.

4. If a person aggrieved by an agency action has the right to judicial appeal and if an agency has an administrative appeal procedure, such person shall, prior to seeking any judicial review, use such agency procedure if any such procedure is available, unless expressly provided otherwise by state statute.

5. Some statutes and ordinances contain time periods for challenging governmental actions which are subject to review under this chapter, such as various local land use approvals (the "underlying governmental action"). RCW 43.21C.080 establishes an optional "notice of action" procedure which, if used, imposes a time period for appealing decisions under this chapter. This subsection does not modify any such time periods. In this subsection, the term "appeal" refers to a judicial appeal only.

   a. If there is a time period for appealing the underlying governmental action, appeals under this chapter shall be commenced within such time period. The agency shall give official notice stating the date and place for commencing an appeal.

   b. If there is no time period for appealing the underlying governmental action, and a notice of action under RCW 43.21C.080 is used, appeals shall be commenced within the time period specified by RCW 43.21C.080.

6. [Empty]

   a. Judicial review under subsection (5) of this section of an appeal decision made by an agency under subsection (3) of this section shall be on the record, consistent with other applicable law.

   b. A taped or written transcript may be used. If a taped transcript is to be reviewed, a record shall identify the location on the taped transcript of testimony and evidence to be reviewed. Parties are encouraged to designate only those portions of the testimony necessary to present the issues raised on review, but if a party alleges that a finding of fact is not supported by evidence, the party should include in the record all evidence relevant to the disputed finding. Any other party may designate additional portions of the taped transcript relating to issues raised on review. A party may provide a written transcript of portions of the testimony at the party's own expense or apply to that court for an order requiring the party seeking review to pay for additional portions of the written transcript.

   c. Judicial review under this chapter shall without exception be of the governmental action together with its accompanying environmental determinations.

7. Jurisdiction over the review of determinations under this chapter in an appeal before an agency or superior court shall upon consent of the parties be transferred in whole or part to the shorelines hearings board. The shorelines hearings board shall hear the matter and sign the final order expeditiously. The superior court shall certify the final order of the shorelines hearings board and the certified final order may only be appealed to an appellate court. In the case of an appeal under this chapter regarding a project or other matter that is also the subject of an appeal to the shorelines hearings board under chapter 90.58 RCW, the shorelines hearings board shall have sole jurisdiction over both the appeal under this section and the appeal under chapter 90.58 RCW, shall consider them together, and shall issue a final order within one hundred eighty days as provided in RCW 90.58.180.

8. For purposes of this section and RCW 43.21C.080, the words "action", "decision", and "determination" mean substantive agency action including any accompanying procedural determinations under this chapter (except where the word "action" means "appeal" in RCW 43.21C.080(2)). The word "action" in this section and RCW 43.21C.080 does not mean a procedural determination by itself made under this chapter. The word "determination" includes any environmental document required by this chapter and state or local implementing rules. The word "agency" refers to any state or local unit of government. Except as provided in subsection (5) of this section, the word "appeal" refers to administrative, legislative, or judicial appeals.

9. The court in its discretion may award reasonable attorneys' fees of up to one thousand dollars in the aggregate to the prevailing party, including a governmental agency, on issues arising out of this chapter if the court makes specific findings that the legal position of a party is frivolous and without reasonable basis.

\[ [1997 c 429 § 49](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/1997-98/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/Senate/6094.SL.pdf?cite=1997%20c%20429%20§%2049); [1995 c 347 § 204](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/1995-96/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/House/1724-S.SL.pdf?cite=1995%20c%20347%20§%20204); [1994 c 253 § 4](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/1993-94/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/Senate/6068-S.SL.pdf?cite=1994%20c%20253%20§%204); [1983 c 117 § 4](http://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1983c117.pdf?cite=1983%20c%20117%20§%204); \]

## 43.21C.080 - Notice of action by governmental agency—How publicized—Time limitation for commencing challenge to action.
1. Notice of any action taken by a governmental agency may be publicized by the acting governmental agency, the applicant for, or the proponent of such action, in substantially the form as set forth in rules adopted under RCW 43.21C.110:

   a. By publishing notice on the same day of each week for two consecutive weeks in a legal newspaper of general circulation in the area where the property which is the subject of the action is located;

   b. By filing notice of such action with the department of ecology at its main office in Olympia prior to the date of the last newspaper publication; and

   c. Except for those actions which are of a nonproject nature, by one of the following methods which shall be accomplished prior to the date of first newspaper publication;

      i. Mailing to the latest recorded real property owners, as shown by the records of the county treasurer, who share a common boundary line with the property upon which the project is proposed through United States mail, first class, postage prepaid.

      ii. Posting of the notice in a conspicuous manner on the property upon which the project is to be constructed.

2. [Empty]

   a. Except as otherwise provided in RCW 43.21C.075(5)(a), any action to set aside, enjoin, review, or otherwise challenge any such governmental action or subsequent governmental action for which notice is given as provided in subsection (1) of this section on grounds of noncompliance with the provisions of this chapter shall be commenced within twenty-one days from the date of last newspaper publication of the notice pursuant to subsection (1) of this section, or be barred.

   b. Any subsequent governmental action on the proposal for which notice has been given as provided in subsection (1) of this section shall not be set aside, enjoined, reviewed, or otherwise challenged on grounds of noncompliance with the provisions of RCW 43.21C.030(2)(a) through (h) unless there has been a substantial change in the proposal between the time of the first governmental action and the subsequent governmental action that is likely to have adverse environmental impacts beyond the range of impacts previously analyzed, or unless the action now being considered was identified in an earlier detailed statement or declaration of nonsignificance as being one which would require further environmental evaluation.

\[ [1995 c 347 § 205](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/1995-96/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/House/1724-S.SL.pdf?cite=1995%20c%20347%20§%20205); [1977 ex.s. c 278 § 1](http://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1977ex1c278.pdf?cite=1977%20ex.s.%20c%20278%20§%201); [1974 ex.s. c 179 § 2](http://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1974ex1c179.pdf?cite=1974%20ex.s.%20c%20179%20§%202); [1973 1st ex.s. c 179 § 2](http://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1973ex1c179.pdf?cite=1973%201st%20ex.s.%20c%20179%20§%202); \]

## 43.21C.087 - List of filings required by RCW  43.21C.080.
The department of ecology shall prepare a list of all filings required by RCW 43.21C.080 each week and shall make such list available to any interested party. The list of filings shall include a brief description of the governmental action and the project involved in such action, along with the location of where information on the project or action may be obtained. Failure of the department to include any project or action shall not affect the running of the statute of limitations provided in RCW 43.21C.080.

\[ [1974 ex.s. c 179 § 14](http://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1974ex1c179.pdf?cite=1974%20ex.s.%20c%20179%20§%2014); \]

## 43.21C.090 - Decision of governmental agency to be accorded substantial weight.
In any action involving an attack on a determination by a governmental agency relative to the requirement or the absence of the requirement, or the adequacy of a "detailed statement", the decision of the governmental agency shall be accorded substantial weight.

\[ [1973 1st ex.s. c 179 § 3](http://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1973ex1c179.pdf?cite=1973%201st%20ex.s.%20c%20179%20§%203); \]

## 43.21C.095 - State environmental policy act rules to be accorded substantial deference.
The rules adopted under RCW 43.21C.110 shall be accorded substantial deference in the interpretation of this chapter.

\[ [2012 1st sp.s. c 1 § 312](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/2011-12/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/Senate/6406-S.SL.pdf?cite=2012%201st%20sp.s.%20c%201%20§%20312); [1983 c 117 § 5](http://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1983c117.pdf?cite=1983%20c%20117%20§%205); \]

## 43.21C.110 - Content of state environmental policy act rules.
It shall be the duty and function of the department of ecology:

1. To adopt and amend rules of interpretation and implementation of this chapter, subject to the requirements of chapter 34.05 RCW, for the purpose of providing uniform rules and guidelines to all branches of government including state agencies, political subdivisions, public and municipal corporations, and counties. The proposed rules shall be subject to full public hearings requirements associated with rule adoption. Suggestions for modifications of the proposed rules shall be considered on their merits, and the department shall have the authority and responsibility for full and appropriate independent adoption of rules, assuring consistency with this chapter as amended and with the preservation of protections afforded by this chapter. The rule-making powers authorized in this section shall include, but shall not be limited to, the following phases of interpretation and implementation of this chapter:

   a. Categories of governmental actions which are not to be considered as potential major actions significantly affecting the quality of the environment, including categories pertaining to applications for water right permits pursuant to chapters 90.03 and 90.44 RCW. The types of actions included as categorical exemptions in the rules shall be limited to those types which are not major actions significantly affecting the quality of the environment. The rules shall provide for certain circumstances where actions which potentially are categorically exempt require environmental review. An action that is categorically exempt under the rules adopted by the department may not be conditioned or denied under this chapter.

   b. Rules for criteria and procedures applicable to the determination of when an act of a branch of government is a major action significantly affecting the quality of the environment for which a detailed statement is required to be prepared pursuant to RCW 43.21C.030.

   c. Rules and procedures applicable to the preparation of detailed statements and other environmental documents, including but not limited to rules for timing of environmental review, obtaining comments, data and other information, and providing for and determining areas of public participation which shall include the scope and review of draft environmental impact statements.

   d. Scope of coverage and contents of detailed statements assuring that such statements are simple, uniform, and as short as practicable; statements are required to analyze only reasonable alternatives and probable adverse environmental impacts which are significant, and may analyze beneficial impacts.

   e. Rules and procedures for public notification of actions taken and documents prepared.

   f. Definition of terms relevant to the implementation of this chapter including the establishment of a list of elements of the environment. Analysis of environmental considerations under RCW 43.21C.030(2) may be required only for those subjects listed as elements of the environment (or portions thereof). The list of elements of the environment shall consist of the "natural" and "built" environment. The elements of the built environment shall consist of public services and utilities (such as water, sewer, schools, fire and police protection), transportation, environmental health (such as explosive materials and toxic waste), and land and shoreline use (including housing, and a description of the relationships with land use and shoreline plans and designations, including population).

   g. Rules for determining the obligations and powers under this chapter of two or more branches of government involved in the same project significantly affecting the quality of the environment.

   h. Methods to assure adequate public awareness of the preparation and issuance of detailed statements required by RCW 43.21C.030(2)(c).

   i. To prepare rules for projects setting forth the time limits within which the governmental entity responsible for the action shall comply with the provisions of this chapter.

   j. Rules for utilization of a detailed statement for more than one action and rules improving environmental analysis of nonproject proposals and encouraging better interagency coordination and integration between this chapter and other environmental laws.

   k. Rules relating to actions which shall be exempt from the provisions of this chapter in situations of emergency.

   l. Rules relating to the use of environmental documents in planning and decision making and the implementation of the substantive policies and requirements of this chapter, including procedures for appeals under this chapter.

   m. Rules and procedures that provide for the integration of environmental review with project review as provided in RCW 43.21C.240. The rules and procedures shall be jointly developed with the department of commerce and shall be applicable to the preparation of environmental documents for actions in counties, cities, and towns planning under RCW 36.70A.040. The rules and procedures shall also include procedures and criteria to analyze planned actions under RCW 43.21C.440 and revisions to the rules adopted under this section to ensure that they are compatible with the requirements and authorizations of chapter 347, Laws of 1995, as amended by chapter 429, Laws of 1997. Ordinances or procedures adopted by a county, city, or town to implement the provisions of chapter 347, Laws of 1995 prior to the effective date of rules adopted under this subsection (1)(m) shall continue to be effective until the adoption of any new or revised ordinances or procedures that may be required. If any revisions are required as a result of rules adopted under this subsection (1)(m), those revisions shall be made within the time limits specified in RCW 43.21C.120.

2. In exercising its powers, functions, and duties under this section, the department may:

   a. Consult with the state agencies and with representatives of science, industry, agriculture, labor, conservation organizations, state and local governments, and other groups, as it deems advisable; and

   b. Utilize, to the fullest extent possible, the services, facilities, and information (including statistical information) of public and private agencies, organizations, and individuals, in order to avoid duplication of effort and expense, overlap, or conflict with similar activities authorized by law and performed by established agencies.

3. Rules adopted pursuant to this section shall be subject to the review procedures of chapter 34.05 RCW.

\[ [2012 1st sp.s. c 1 § 311](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/2011-12/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/Senate/6406-S.SL.pdf?cite=2012%201st%20sp.s.%20c%201%20§%20311); [1997 c 429 § 47](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/1997-98/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/Senate/6094.SL.pdf?cite=1997%20c%20429%20§%2047); [1995 c 347 § 206](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/1995-96/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/House/1724-S.SL.pdf?cite=1995%20c%20347%20§%20206); [1983 c 117 § 7](http://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1983c117.pdf?cite=1983%20c%20117%20§%207); [1974 ex.s. c 179 § 6](http://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1974ex1c179.pdf?cite=1974%20ex.s.%20c%20179%20§%206); \]

## 43.21C.120 - Rules, ordinances, resolutions and regulations—Adoption—Effective dates.
1. All agencies of government of this state are directed, consistent with rules and guidelines adopted under RCW 43.21C.110, including any revisions, to adopt rules pertaining to the integration of the policies and procedures of this chapter (the state environmental policy act of 1971), into the various programs under their jurisdiction for implementation. Designation of polices [policies] under RCW 43.21C.060 and adoption of rules required under this section shall take place not later than one hundred eighty days after the effective date of rules and guidelines adopted pursuant to RCW 43.21C.110, or after the establishment of an agency, whichever shall occur later.

2. Rules adopted by state agencies under subsection (1) of this section shall be adopted in accordance with the provisions of chapter 34.05 RCW and shall be subject to the review procedures of RCW * 34.05.538 and 34.05.240.

3. All public and municipal corporations, political subdivisions, and counties of this state are directed, consistent with rules and guidelines adopted under RCW 43.21C.110, including any revisions, to adopt rules, ordinances, or resolutions pertaining to the integration of the policies and procedures of this chapter (the state environmental policy act of 1971), into the various programs under their jurisdiction for implementation. Designation of policies under RCW 43.21C.060 and adoption of the rules required under this section shall take place not later than one hundred eighty days after the effective date of rules and guidelines adopted pursuant to RCW 43.21C.110, or after the establishment of the governmental entity, whichever shall occur later.

4. Ordinances or regulations adopted prior to the effective date of rules and guidelines adopted pursuant to RCW 43.21C.110 shall continue to be effective until the adoptions of any new or revised ordinances or regulations which may be required: PROVIDED, That revisions required by this section as a result of rule changes under RCW 43.21C.110 are made within the time limits specified by this section.

\[ [1983 c 117 § 8](http://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1983c117.pdf?cite=1983%20c%20117%20§%208); [1974 ex.s. c 179 § 8](http://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1974ex1c179.pdf?cite=1974%20ex.s.%20c%20179%20§%208); \]

## 43.21C.130 - Model ordinances.
The department of ecology, in consultation with concerned state agencies, shall with the assistance of the associations of county prosecutors and city attorneys, the association of county elected officials, the Washington state association of counties, and the association of cities, draft model ordinances for use by counties, cities and towns in drafting their ordinances under this chapter.

\[ [1974 ex.s. c 179 § 10](http://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1974ex1c179.pdf?cite=1974%20ex.s.%20c%20179%20§%2010); \]

## 43.21C.135 - Authority of local governmental units to adopt rules, guidelines and model ordinances by reference.
1. All public and municipal corporations, political subdivisions, and counties of the state are authorized to adopt rules, ordinances, and resolutions which incorporate any of the following by reference to the appropriate sections of the Washington Administrative Code:

   a. Rules and guidelines adopted under RCW 43.21C.110(1) in accordance with the administrative procedure act, chapter 34.05 RCW;

   b. Model ordinances adopted by the department of ecology under RCW 43.21C.130 in accordance with the administrative procedure act, chapter 34.05 RCW.

2. If any rule, ordinance, or resolution is adopted by reference pursuant to subsection (1) of this section, any publication of such rule, ordinance, or resolution shall be accompanied by a summary of the contents of the sections of the Washington Administrative Code referred to. Such summaries shall be provided to the adopting units of local government by the department of ecology: PROVIDED, That any proposal for a rule, ordinance or resolution which would adopt by reference rules and guidelines or model ordinances pursuant to this section shall be accompanied by the full text of the material to be adopted which need not be published but shall be maintained on file for public use and examination.

3. Whenever any rule, ordinance, or resolution is adopted by reference pursuant to subsection (1) of this section, the corporation, political subdivision, or county of the state adopting the rule, ordinance, or resolution shall maintain on file for public use and examination not less than three copies of the sections of the Washington Administrative Code referred to.

\[ 1975-'76 2nd ex.s. c 99 § 1; \]

## 43.21C.150 - RCW  43.21C.030(2)(c) inapplicable when statement previously prepared pursuant to national environmental policy act.
The requirements of RCW 43.21C.030(2)(c) pertaining to the preparation of a detailed statement by branches of government shall not apply when an adequate detailed statement has been previously prepared pursuant to the national environmental policy act of 1969, in which event said prepared statement may be utilized in lieu of a separately prepared statement under RCW 43.21C.030(2)(c).

\[ [1975 1st ex.s. c 206 § 1](http://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1975ex1c206.pdf?cite=1975%201st%20ex.s.%20c%20206%20§%201); [1974 ex.s. c 179 § 12](http://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1974ex1c179.pdf?cite=1974%20ex.s.%20c%20179%20§%2012); \]

## 43.21C.160 - Utilization of statement prepared under RCW  43.21C.030 to implement *chapter  90.62 RCW—Utilization of *chapter  90.62 RCW procedures to satisfy RCW  43.21C.030(2)(c).
In the implementation of *chapter 90.62 RCW (the Environmental Coordination Procedures Act of 1973), the department of ecology, consistent with guidelines adopted by the council shall adopt rules which insure that one detailed statement prepared under RCW 43.21C.030 may be utilized by all branches of government participating in the processing of a master application. Whenever the procedures established pursuant to *chapter 90.62 RCW are used, those procedures shall be utilized wherever possible to satisfy the procedural requirements of RCW 43.21C.030(2)(c). The time limits for challenges provided for in RCW 43.21C.080(2) shall be applicable when such procedures are so utilized.

\[ [1974 ex.s. c 179 § 13](http://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1974ex1c179.pdf?cite=1974%20ex.s.%20c%20179%20§%2013); \]

## 43.21C.170 - Council on environmental policy.
The legislature may establish a council on environmental policy to review and assist in the implementation of this chapter.

\[ [1983 c 117 § 6](http://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1983c117.pdf?cite=1983%20c%20117%20§%206); [1974 ex.s. c 179 § 4](http://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1974ex1c179.pdf?cite=1974%20ex.s.%20c%20179%20§%204); \]

## 43.21C.175 - Council on environmental policy—Personnel.
The council may employ such personnel as are necessary for the performances of its duties.

\[ [1974 ex.s. c 179 § 5](http://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1974ex1c179.pdf?cite=1974%20ex.s.%20c%20179%20§%205); \]

## 43.21C.210 - Certain actions during state of emergency exempt from chapter.
This chapter does not apply to actions authorized by RCW 70A.10.200 and 70A.10.210 which are undertaken during a state of emergency declared by the governor under RCW 43.06.210.

\[ [2020 c 20 § 1041](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/2019-20/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/House/2246-S.SL.pdf?cite=2020%20c%2020%20§%201041); [1981 c 278 § 4](http://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1981c278.pdf?cite=1981%20c%20278%20§%204); \]

## 43.21C.220 - Incorporation of city or town exempt from chapter.
The incorporation of a city or town is exempted from compliance with this chapter.

\[ [1982 c 220 § 6](http://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1982c220.pdf?cite=1982%20c%20220%20§%206); \]

## 43.21C.222 - Annexation by city or town exempt from chapter.
Annexation of territory by a city or town is exempted from compliance with this chapter.

\[ [1994 c 216 § 19](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/1993-94/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/House/2176-S.SL.pdf?cite=1994%20c%20216%20§%2019); \]

## 43.21C.225 - Consolidation and annexation of cities and towns exempt from chapter.
Consolidations of cities or towns, and the annexations of all of a city or town by another city or town, are exempted from compliance with this chapter.

\[ [1985 c 281 § 29](http://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1985c281.pdf?cite=1985%20c%20281%20§%2029); \]

## 43.21C.227 - Disincorporation of a city or town or reduction of city or town limits exempt from chapter.
1. The disincorporation of a city or town is exempt from compliance with this chapter.

2. The reduction of city or town limits is exempt from compliance with this chapter.

\[ [2002 c 93 § 2](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/2001-02/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/House/2526.SL.pdf?cite=2002%20c%2093%20§%202); \]

## 43.21C.229 - Infill development—Categorical exemptions from chapter.
1. In order to accommodate infill development and thereby realize the goals and policies of comprehensive plans adopted according to chapter 36.70A RCW, a city or county planning under RCW 36.70A.040 is authorized by this section to establish categorical exemptions from the requirements of this chapter. An exemption adopted under this section applies even if it differs from the categorical exemptions adopted by rule of the department under RCW 43.21C.110(1)(a). An exemption may be adopted by a city or county under this section if it meets the following criteria:

   a. It categorically exempts government action related to development proposed to fill in an urban growth area, designated according to RCW 36.70A.110, where current density and intensity of use in the area is roughly equal to or lower than called for in the goals and policies of the applicable comprehensive plan and the development is either:

      i. Residential development;

      ii. Mixed-use development; or

      iii. Commercial development up to sixty-five thousand square feet, excluding retail development;

   b. It does not exempt government action related to development that is inconsistent with the applicable comprehensive plan or would clearly exceed the density or intensity of use called for in the goals and policies of the applicable comprehensive plan;

   c. The local government considers the specific probable adverse environmental impacts of the proposed action and determines that these specific impacts are adequately addressed by the development regulations or other applicable requirements of the comprehensive plan, subarea plan element of the comprehensive plan, planned action ordinance, or other local, state, or federal rules or laws; and

   d. [Empty]

      i. The city or county's applicable comprehensive plan was previously subjected to environmental analysis through an environmental impact statement under the requirements of this chapter prior to adoption; or

      ii. The city or county has prepared an environmental impact statement that considers the proposed use or density and intensity of use in the area proposed for an exemption under this section.

2. Any categorical exemption adopted by a city or county under this section shall be subject to the rules of the department adopted according to RCW 43.21C.110(1)(a) that provide exceptions to the use of categorical exemptions adopted by the department.

\[ [2020 c 87 § 1](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/2019-20/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/House/2673-S.SL.pdf?cite=2020%20c%2087%20§%201); [2012 1st sp.s. c 1 § 304](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/2011-12/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/Senate/6406-S.SL.pdf?cite=2012%201st%20sp.s.%20c%201%20§%20304); [2003 c 298 § 1](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/2003-04/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/House/1707-S.SL.pdf?cite=2003%20c%20298%20§%201); \]

## 43.21C.230 - Development and adoption of plan under chapter  43.180 RCW exempt from chapter.
This chapter does not apply to the development or adoption of the plan required to be developed and adopted under chapter 43.180 RCW.

\[ [1983 c 161 § 29](http://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1983c161.pdf?cite=1983%20c%20161%20§%2029); \]

## 43.21C.240 - Project review under the growth management act.
1. If the requirements of subsection (2) of this section are satisfied, a county, city, or town reviewing a project action shall determine that the requirements for environmental analysis, protection, and mitigation measures in the county, city, or town's development regulations and comprehensive plans adopted under chapter 36.70A RCW, and in other applicable local, state, or federal laws and rules provide adequate analysis of and mitigation for the specific adverse environmental impacts of the project action to which the requirements apply. Rules adopted by the department according to RCW 43.21C.110 regarding project specific impacts that may not have been adequately addressed apply to any determination made under this section. In these situations, in which all adverse environmental impacts will be mitigated below the level of significance as a result of mitigation measures included by changing, clarifying, or conditioning of the proposed action and/or regulatory requirements of development regulations adopted under chapter 36.70A RCW or other local, state, or federal laws, a determination of nonsignificance or a mitigated determination of nonsignificance is the proper threshold determination.

2. A county, city, or town shall make the determination provided for in subsection (1) of this section if:

   a. In the course of project review, including any required environmental analysis, the local government considers the specific probable adverse environmental impacts of the proposed action and determines that these specific impacts are adequately addressed by the development regulations or other applicable requirements of the comprehensive plan, subarea plan element of the comprehensive plan, or other local, state, or federal rules or laws; and

   b. The local government bases or conditions its approval on compliance with these requirements or mitigation measures.

3. If a county, city, or town's comprehensive plans, subarea plans, and development regulations adequately address a project's probable specific adverse environmental impacts, as determined under subsections (1) and (2) of this section, the county, city, or town shall not impose additional mitigation under this chapter during project review. Project review shall be integrated with environmental analysis under this chapter.

4. A comprehensive plan, subarea plan, or development regulation shall be considered to adequately address an impact if the county, city, or town, through the planning and environmental review process under chapter 36.70A RCW and this chapter, has identified the specific adverse environmental impacts and:

   a. The impacts have been avoided or otherwise mitigated; or

   b. The legislative body of the county, city, or town has designated as acceptable certain levels of service, land use designations, development standards, or other land use planning required or allowed by chapter 36.70A RCW.

5. In deciding whether a specific adverse environmental impact has been addressed by an existing rule or law of another agency with jurisdiction with environmental expertise with regard to a specific environmental impact, the county, city, or town shall consult orally or in writing with that agency and may expressly defer to that agency. In making this deferral, the county, city, or town shall base or condition its project approval on compliance with these other existing rules or laws.

6. Nothing in this section limits the authority of an agency in its review or mitigation of a project to adopt or otherwise rely on environmental analyses and requirements under other laws, as provided by this chapter.

7. This section shall apply only to a county, city, or town planning under RCW 36.70A.040.

\[ [2003 c 298 § 2](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/2003-04/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/House/1707-S.SL.pdf?cite=2003%20c%20298%20§%202); [1995 c 347 § 202](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/1995-96/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/House/1724-S.SL.pdf?cite=1995%20c%20347%20§%20202); \]

## 43.21C.250 - Forest practices board—Emergency rules—Exempt from chapter.
The duration and process for adopting emergency rules by the forest practices board pertaining to forest practices and the protection of aquatic resources as provided in RCW 76.09.055 are exempt from the procedural requirements of this chapter.

\[ [1999 sp.s. c 4 § 203](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/1999-00/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/House/2091-S.SL.pdf?cite=1999%20sp.s.%20c%204%20§%20203); \]

## 43.21C.260 - Certain actions not subject to RCW  43.21C.030(2)(c)—Threshold determination on a watershed analysis.
1. Decisions pertaining to the following kinds of actions under chapter 4, Laws of 1999 sp. sess. are not subject to any procedural requirements implementing RCW 43.21C.030(2)(c): (a) Approval of forest road maintenance and abandonment plans under chapter 76.09 RCW and *RCW 77.55.100; (b) approval by the department of natural resources of future timber harvest schedules involving east-side clear cuts under rules implementing chapter 76.09 RCW; (c) acquisitions of forestlands in stream channel migration zones under RCW 76.09.040; and (d) acquisitions of conservation easements pertaining to forestlands in riparian zones under RCW 76.13.120.

2. For purposes of the department's threshold determination on a watershed analysis, the department shall not make a determination of significance unless the prescriptions themselves, compared to rules or prescriptions in place prior to the analysis, will cause probable significant adverse impact on elements of the environment other than those addressed in the watershed analysis process. Nothing in this subsection shall be construed to effect the outcome of pending litigation regarding the department's authority in making a threshold determination on a watershed analysis.

\[ [2003 c 39 § 24](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/2003-04/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/Senate/5172.SL.pdf?cite=2003%20c%2039%20§%2024); [1999 sp.s. c 4 § 1201](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/1999-00/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/House/2091-S.SL.pdf?cite=1999%20sp.s.%20c%204%20§%201201); \]

## 43.21C.300 - Workshops—Handbook.
The department of ecology shall conduct annual statewide workshops and publish an annual state environmental policy act handbook or supplement to assist persons in complying with the provisions of this chapter and the implementing rules. The workshops and handbook shall include, but not be limited to, measures to assist in preparation, processing, and review of environmental documents, relevant court decisions affecting this chapter or rules adopted under this chapter, legislative changes to this chapter, administrative changes to the rules, and any other information which will assist in orderly implementation of this chapter and rules.

The department shall develop the handbook and conduct the workshops in cooperation with, but not limited to, state agencies, the association of Washington cities, the Washington association of counties, educational institutions, and other groups or associations interested in the state environmental policy act.

\[ [1983 c 117 § 9](http://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1983c117.pdf?cite=1983%20c%20117%20§%209); \]

## 43.21C.400 - Unfinished nuclear power projects—Council action exempt from this chapter.
Council actions pursuant to the transfer of the site or portions of the site under RCW 80.50.300 are exempt from the provisions of this chapter.

\[ [1996 c 4 § 4](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/1995-96/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/Senate/6427-S.SL.pdf?cite=1996%20c%204%20§%204); \]

## 43.21C.410 - Battery charging and exchange station installation.
1. The installation of individual battery charging stations and battery exchange stations, which individually are categorically exempt under the rules adopted under RCW 43.21C.110, may not be disqualified from such categorically exempt status as a result of their being parts of a larger proposal that includes other such facilities and related utility networks under the rules adopted under RCW 43.21C.110.

2. The definitions in this subsection apply throughout this section unless the context clearly requires otherwise.

   a. "Battery charging station" means an electrical component assembly or cluster of component assemblies designed specifically to charge batteries within electric vehicles, which meet or exceed any standards, codes, and regulations set forth by chapter 19.28 RCW and consistent with rules adopted under RCW 19.27.540.

   b. "Battery exchange station" means a fully automated facility that will enable an electric vehicle with a swappable battery to enter a drive lane and exchange the depleted battery with a fully charged battery through a fully automated process, which meets or exceeds any standards, codes, and regulations set forth by chapter 19.28 RCW and consistent with rules adopted under RCW 19.27.540.

\[ [2009 c 459 § 8](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/2009-10/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/House/1481-S2.SL.pdf?cite=2009%20c%20459%20§%208); \]

## 43.21C.420 - Comprehensive plans and development regulations—Optional elements—Nonproject environmental impact statements—Subarea plans—Transfer of development rights program—Recovery of expenses.
1. Cities with a population greater than five thousand, in accordance with their existing comprehensive planning and development regulation authority under chapter 36.70A RCW, and in accordance with this section, may adopt optional elements of their comprehensive plans and optional development regulations that apply within specified subareas of the cities, that are either:

   a. Areas designated as mixed-use or urban centers in a land use or transportation plan adopted by a regional transportation planning organization; or

   b. Areas within one-half mile of a major transit stop that are zoned to have an average minimum density of fifteen dwelling units or more per gross acre.

2. Cities located on the east side of the Cascade mountains and located in a county with a population of two hundred thirty thousand or less, in accordance with their existing comprehensive planning and development regulation authority under chapter 36.70A RCW, and in accordance with this section, may adopt optional elements of their comprehensive plans and optional development regulations that apply within the mixed-use or urban centers. The optional elements of their comprehensive plans and optional development regulations must enhance pedestrian, bicycle, transit, or other nonvehicular transportation methods.

3. A major transit stop is defined as:

   a. A stop on a high capacity transportation service funded or expanded under the provisions of chapter 81.104 RCW;

   b. Commuter rail stops;

   c. Stops on rail or fixed guideway systems, including transitways;

   d. Stops on bus rapid transit routes or routes that run on high occupancy vehicle lanes; or

   e. Stops for a bus or other transit mode providing fixed route service at intervals of at least thirty minutes during the peak hours of operation.

4. [Empty]

   a. A city that elects to adopt such an optional comprehensive plan element and optional development regulations shall prepare a nonproject environmental impact statement, pursuant to RCW 43.21C.030, assessing and disclosing the probable significant adverse environmental impacts of the optional comprehensive plan element and development regulations and of future development that is consistent with the plan and regulations.

   b. At least one community meeting must be held on the proposed subarea plan before the scoping notice for such a nonproject environmental impact statement is issued. Notice of scoping for such a nonproject environmental impact statement and notice of the community meeting required by this section must be mailed to all property owners of record within the subarea to be studied, to all property owners within one hundred fifty feet of the boundaries of such a subarea, to all affected federally recognized tribal governments whose ceded area is within one-half mile of the boundaries of the subarea, and to agencies with jurisdiction over the future development anticipated within the subarea.

   c. The notice of the community meeting must include general illustrations and descriptions of buildings generally representative of the maximum building envelope that will be allowed under the proposed plan and indicate that future appeals of proposed developments that are consistent with the plan will be limited. Notice of the community meeting must include signs located on major travel routes in the subarea. If the building envelope increases during the process, another notice complying with the requirements of this section must be issued before the next public involvement opportunity.

   d. Any person that has standing to appeal the adoption of this subarea plan or the implementing regulations under RCW 36.70A.280 has standing to bring an appeal of the nonproject environmental impact statement required by this subsection.

   e. As an incentive for development authorized under this section, a city shall consider establishing a transfer of development rights program in consultation with the county where the city is located, that conserves county-designated agricultural and forestland of long-term commercial significance. If the city decides not to establish a transfer of development rights program, the city must state in the record the reasons for not adopting the program. The city's decision not to establish a transfer of development rights program is not subject to appeal. Nothing in this subsection (4)(e) may be used as a basis to challenge the optional comprehensive plan or subarea plan policies authorized under this section.

5. [Empty]

   a. Until July 1, 2029, a proposed development that meets the criteria of (b) of this subsection may not be challenged in administrative or judicial appeals for noncompliance with this chapter as long as a complete application for such a development that vests the application or would later lead to vested status under city or state law is submitted to the city within a time frame established by the city, but not to exceed the following time frames:

      i. Nineteen years from the date of issuance of the final environmental impact statement, for projects that are consistent with an optional element adopted by a city as of July 28, 2019; or

      ii. Ten years from the date of issuance of the final environmental impact statement, for projects that are consistent with an optional element adopted by a city after July 28, 2019.

   b. A proposed development may not be challenged, consistent with the timelines established in (a) of this subsection, so long as the development:

      i. Is consistent with the optional comprehensive plan or subarea plan policies and development regulations adopted under subsection (1) or (2) of this section;

      ii. Sets aside or requires the occupancy of at least ten percent of the dwelling units, or a greater percentage as determined by city development regulations, within the development for low-income households at a sale price or rental amount that is considered affordable by a city's housing programs. This subsection (5)(b)(ii) applies only to projects that are consistent with an optional element adopted by a city pursuant to this section after July 28, 2019; and

      iii. Is environmentally reviewed under subsection (4) of this section.

   c. After July 1, 2029, the immunity from appeals under this chapter of any application that vests or will vest under this subsection or the ability to vest under this subsection is still valid, provided that the final subarea environmental impact statement is issued by July 1, 2029. After July 1, 2029, a city may continue to collect reimbursement fees under subsection (6) of this section for the proportionate share of a subarea environmental impact statement issued prior to July 1, 2029.

6. It is recognized that a city that prepares a nonproject environmental impact statement under subsection (4) of this section must endure a substantial financial burden. A city may recover or apply for a grant or loan to prospectively cover its reasonable expenses of preparation of a nonproject environmental impact statement prepared under subsection (4) of this section through access to financial assistance under RCW 36.70A.490 or funding from private sources. In addition, a city is authorized to recover a portion of its reasonable expenses of preparation of such a nonproject environmental impact statement by the assessment of reasonable and proportionate fees upon subsequent development that is consistent with the plan and development regulations adopted under subsection (5) of this section, as long as the development makes use of and benefits from, as described in subsection (5) of this section, the nonproject environmental impact statement prepared by the city. Any assessment fees collected from subsequent development may be used to reimburse funding received from private sources. In order to collect such fees, the city must enact an ordinance that sets forth objective standards for determining how the fees to be imposed upon each development will be proportionate to the impacts of each development and to the benefits accruing to each development from the nonproject environmental impact statement. Any disagreement about the reasonableness or amount of the fees imposed upon a development may not be the basis for delay in issuance of a project permit for that development. The fee assessed by the city may be paid with the written stipulation "paid under protest" and if the city provides for an administrative appeal of its decision on the project for which the fees are imposed, any dispute about the amount of the fees must be resolved in the same administrative appeal process.

7. If a proposed development is inconsistent with the optional comprehensive plan or subarea plan policies and development regulations adopted under subsection (1) of this section, the city shall require additional environmental review in accordance with this chapter.

\[ [2019 c 348 § 7](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/2019-20/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/House/1923-S2.SL.pdf?cite=2019%20c%20348%20§%207); [2010 c 153 § 2](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/2009-10/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/House/2538-S.SL.pdf?cite=2010%20c%20153%20§%202); \]

## 43.21C.428 - Recovery of expenses of nonproject environmental impact statements—Fees for subsequent development.
1. A county, city, or town may recover its reasonable expenses of preparation of a nonproject environmental impact statement prepared under RCW 43.21C.229 and 43.21C.440:

   a. Through access to financial assistance under RCW 36.70A.490;

   b. With funding from private sources; and

   c. By the assessment of fees consistent with the requirements and limitations of this section.

2. [Empty]

   a. A county, city, or town is authorized to assess a fee upon subsequent development that will make use of and benefit from: (i) The analysis in an environmental impact statement prepared for the purpose of compliance with RCW 43.21C.440 regarding planned actions; or (ii) the reduction in environmental analysis requirements resulting from the exercise of authority under RCW 43.21C.229 regarding infill development.

   b. The amount of the fee must be reasonable and proportionate to the total expenses incurred by the county, city, or town in the preparation of the environmental impact statement.

   c. Counties, cities, and towns are not authorized by this section to assess fees for general comprehensive plan amendments or updates.

3. A county, city, or town assessing fees under subsection (2)(a) of this section must provide for a mechanism by which project proponents may either elect to utilize the environmental review completed by the lead agency and pay the fees under subsection (1) of this section or certify that they do not want the local jurisdiction to utilize the environmental review completed as a part of a planned action and therefore not be assessed any associated fees. Project proponents who choose this option may not make use of or benefit from the up-front environmental review prepared by the local jurisdiction.

4. Prior to the collection of fees, the county, city, or town must enact an ordinance that establishes the total amount of expenses to be recovered through fees and provides objective standards for determining the fee amount to be imposed upon each development proposal proportionate to the impacts of each development and to the benefits accruing to each development from the nonproject environmental review. The ordinance must provide: (a) A procedure by which an applicant who disagrees with whether the amount of the fee is correct, reasonable, or proportionate may pay the fee with the written stipulation "paid under protest"; and (b) if the county, city, or town provides for an administrative appeal of its decision on the project for which the fees are imposed, any dispute about the amount of the fees must be resolved in the same administrative appeals process. Any disagreement about the reasonableness, proportionality, or amount of the fees imposed upon a development may not be the basis for delay in issuance of a project permit for that development.

5. The ordinance adopted under subsection (4) of this section must make information available about the amount of the expenses designated for recovery. When these expenses have been fully recovered, the county, city, or town may no longer assess a fee under this section.

6. Any fees collected under this section from subsequent development may be used to reimburse funding received from private sources to conduct the environmental review.

7. The county, city, or town shall refund fees collected where a court of competent jurisdiction determines that the environmental review conducted under RCW 43.21C.440, regarding planned actions, or under RCW 43.21C.229, regarding infill development, was not sufficient to comply with the requirements of this chapter regarding the proposed development activity for which the fees were collected. The applicant and the county, city, or town may mutually agree to a partial refund or to waive the refund in the interest of resolving any dispute regarding compliance with this chapter.

\[ [2013 c 243 § 1](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/2013-14/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/House/1717-S.SL.pdf?cite=2013%20c%20243%20§%201); \]

## 43.21C.430 - Certain fish protection standards exempt from compliance with chapter.
The incorporation of fish protection standards adopted under chapter 77.55 RCW into the forest practices rules as required under RCW 76.09.040(3) is exempt from compliance with this chapter.

\[ [2012 1st sp.s. c 1 § 213](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/2011-12/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/Senate/6406-S.SL.pdf?cite=2012%201st%20sp.s.%20c%201%20§%20213); \]

## 43.21C.440 - Planned action—Defined—Authority of a county, city, or town—Community meetings.
1. For purposes of this chapter, a planned action means one or more types of development or redevelopment that meet the following criteria:

   a. Are designated as planned actions by an ordinance or resolution adopted by a county, city, or town planning under RCW 36.70A.040;

   b. In conjunction with, or to implement, a comprehensive plan or subarea plan adopted under chapter 36.70A RCW, or a fully contained community, a master planned resort, a master planned development, or a phased project, have had the significant impacts adequately addressed:

      i. In an environmental impact statement under the requirements of this chapter; or

      ii. In a threshold determination or, where one is appropriate, in an environmental impact statement under the requirements of this chapter, if the planned action contains mixed use or residential development and encompasses an area that:

          A.  Is within one-half mile of a major transit stop; or

          B.  Will be within one-half mile of a major transit stop no later than five years from the date of the designation of the planned action;

   c. Have had project level significant impacts adequately addressed in a threshold determination or, where one is required under (b) of this subsection or where otherwise appropriate, an environmental impact statement, unless the impacts are specifically deferred for consideration at the project level pursuant to subsection (3)(b) of this section;

   d. Are subsequent or implementing projects for the proposals listed in (b) of this subsection;

   e. Are located within an urban growth area designated pursuant to RCW 36.70A.110;

   f. Are not essential public facilities, as defined in RCW 36.70A.200, unless an essential public facility is accessory to or part of a residential, office, school, commercial, recreational, service, or industrial development that is designated a planned action under this subsection; and

   g. Are consistent with a comprehensive plan or subarea plan adopted under chapter 36.70A RCW.

2. A county, city, or town shall define the types of development included in the planned action and may limit a planned action to:

   a. A specific geographic area that is less extensive than the jurisdictional boundaries of the county, city, or town; or

   b. A time period identified in the ordinance or resolution adopted under this subsection.

3. [Empty]

   a. A county, city, or town shall determine during permit review whether a proposed project is consistent with a planned action ordinance adopted by the jurisdiction. To determine project consistency with a planned action ordinance, a county, city, or town may utilize a modified checklist pursuant to the rules adopted to implement RCW 43.21C.110, a form that is designated within the planned action ordinance, or a form contained in agency rules adopted pursuant to RCW 43.21C.120.

   b. A county, city, or town is not required to make a threshold determination and may not require additional environmental review, for a proposal that is determined to be consistent with the development or redevelopment described in the planned action ordinance, except for impacts that are specifically deferred to the project level at the time of the planned action ordinance's adoption. At least one community meeting must be held before the notice is issued for the planned action ordinance. Notice for the planned action and notice of the community meeting required by this subsection (3)(b) must be mailed or otherwise verifiably provided to: (i) All affected federally recognized tribal governments; and (ii) agencies with jurisdiction over the future development anticipated for the planned action. The determination of consistency, and the adequacy of any environmental review that was specifically deferred, are subject to the type of administrative appeal that the county, city, or town provides for the proposal itself consistent with RCW 36.70B.060.

4. For a planned action ordinance that encompasses the entire jurisdictional boundary of a county, city, or town, at least one community meeting must be held before the notice is issued for the planned action ordinance. Notice for the planned action ordinance and notice of the community meeting required by this subsection must be mailed or otherwise verifiably provided to:

   a. All property owners of record within the county, city, or town;

   b. All affected federally recognized tribal governments; and

   c. All agencies with jurisdiction over the future development anticipated for the planned action.

5. For purposes of this section, "major transit stop" means a commuter rail stop, a stop on a rail or fixed guideway or transitway system, or a stop on a high capacity transportation service funded or expanded under chapter 81.104 RCW.

\[ [2017 3rd sp.s. c 16 § 7](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/2017-18/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/Senate/5254-S2.SL.pdf?cite=2017%203rd%20sp.s.%20c%2016%20§%207); [2012 1st sp.s. c 1 § 303](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/2011-12/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/Senate/6406-S.SL.pdf?cite=2012%201st%20sp.s.%20c%201%20§%20303); \]

## 43.21C.450 - Nonproject actions exempt from requirements of chapter.
The following nonproject actions are categorically exempt from the requirements of this chapter:

1. Amendments to development regulations that are required to ensure consistency with an adopted comprehensive plan pursuant to RCW 36.70A.040, where the comprehensive plan was previously subjected to environmental review pursuant to this chapter and the impacts associated with the proposed regulation were specifically addressed in the prior environmental review;

2. Amendments to development regulations that are required to ensure consistency with a shoreline master program approved pursuant to RCW 90.58.090, where the shoreline master program was previously subjected to environmental review pursuant to this chapter and the impacts associated with the proposed regulation were specifically addressed in the prior environmental review;

3. Amendments to development regulations that, upon implementation of a project action, will provide increased environmental protection, limited to the following:

   a. Increased protections for critical areas, such as enhanced buffers or setbacks;

   b. Increased vegetation retention or decreased impervious surface areas in shoreline jurisdiction; and

   c. Increased vegetation retention or decreased impervious surface areas in critical areas;

4. Amendments to technical codes adopted by a county, city, or town to ensure consistency with minimum standards contained in state law, including the following:

   a. Building codes required by chapter 19.27 RCW;

   b. Energy codes required by chapter 19.27A RCW; and

   c. Electrical codes required by chapter 19.28 RCW.

\[ [2012 1st sp.s. c 1 § 307](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/2011-12/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/Senate/6406-S.SL.pdf?cite=2012%201st%20sp.s.%20c%201%20§%20307); \]

## 43.21C.460 - Environmental checklist—Authority of lead agency—Limitations of section.
1. The lead agency for an environmental review under this chapter utilizing an environmental checklist developed by the department of ecology pursuant to RCW 43.21C.110 may identify within the checklist provided to applicants instances where questions on the checklist are adequately covered by a locally adopted ordinance, development regulation, land use plan, or other legal authority.

2. If a lead agency identifies an instance as described in subsection (1) of this section, it still must consider whether the action has an impact on the particular element or elements of the environment in question.

3. In instances where the locally adopted ordinance, development regulation, land use plan, or other legal authority provide the necessary information to answer a specific question, the lead agency must explain how the proposed project satisfies the underlying local legal authority.

4. If the lead agency identifies instances where questions on the checklist are adequately covered by a locally adopted ordinance, development regulation, land use plan, or other legal authority, an applicant may still provide answers to any questions on the checklist.

5. Nothing in this section authorizes a lead agency to ignore or delete a question on the checklist.

6. Nothing in this section changes the standard for whether an environmental impact statement is required for an action that may have a probable significant, adverse environmental impact pursuant to RCW 43.21C.030.

7. Nothing in this section affects the appeal provisions provided in this chapter.

8. Nothing in this section modifies existing rules for determining the lead agency, as defined in WAC 197-11-922 through 197-11-948, nor does it modify agency procedures for complying with the state environmental policy act when an agency other than a local government is serving as the lead agency.

\[ [2012 1st sp.s. c 1 § 308](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/2011-12/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/Senate/6406-S.SL.pdf?cite=2012%201st%20sp.s.%20c%201%20§%20308); \]

## 43.21C.470 - Categorical exemption for structurally deficient bridges—Definition.
1. The department [of ecology] must amend the categorical exemption available to Washington department of transportation projects under WAC 197-11-800(26) as of July 24, 2015, so that the same categorical exemption applies to structurally deficient city, town, or county bridge repair or replacement projects.

2. For purposes of this section, "structurally deficient" means a bridge that is classified as in poor condition under the state bridge condition rating system and is reported by the state to the national bridge inventory as having a deck, superstructure, or substructure rating of four or below. Structurally deficient bridges are characterized by deteriorated conditions of significant bridge elements and potentially reduced load-carrying capacity. Bridges deemed structurally deficient typically require significant maintenance and repair to remain in service, and require major rehabilitation or replacement to address the underlying deficiency.

\[ [2015 c 144 § 1](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/2015-16/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/House/1851-S.SL.pdf?cite=2015%20c%20144%20§%201); \]

## 43.21C.480 - Repair or replacement of structurally deficient state bridges exempt from chapter.
The repair or replacement of a state bridge deemed structurally deficient, as defined in RCW 47.04.010, is exempt from compliance with this chapter as long as the action occurs within the existing right-of-way, except that the repair or replacement may occur outside the existing right-of-way as needed to meet current engineering standards or state or local environmental permit requirements for highway construction as long as the repair or replacement does not result in additional lanes for automobiles. The issuance of applicable state and local agency permits or approvals associated with the repair or replacement of such bridges is also included in this exemption from compliance with this chapter.

\[ [2015 3rd sp.s. c 10 § 2](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/2015-16/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/House/1219.SL.pdf?cite=2015%203rd%20sp.s.%20c%2010%20§%202); \]

## 43.21C.490 - Formation of community facilities districts exempt from this chapter.
The formation of a community facilities district under chapter 36.145 RCW is exempted from compliance with this chapter, unless such formation constitutes a final agency decision to undertake construction of a structure or facility not otherwise exempt under state law or rule.

\[ [2019 c 260 § 2](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/2019-20/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/House/1366.SL.pdf?cite=2019%20c%20260%20§%202); \]

## 43.21C.495 - Amendments to development regulations and other nonproject actions taken by a city to implement RCW  36.70A.600 not subject to administrative or judicial appeals.
If adopted by April 1, 2023, amendments to development regulations and other nonproject actions taken by a city to implement RCW 36.70A.600 (1) or (4), with the exception of the action specified in RCW 36.70A.600(1)(f), are not subject to administrative or judicial appeals under this chapter.

\[ [2020 c 173 § 2](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/2019-20/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/House/2343-S.SL.pdf?cite=2020%20c%20173%20§%202); [2019 c 348 § 4](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/2019-20/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/House/1923-S2.SL.pdf?cite=2019%20c%20348%20§%204); \]

## 43.21C.501 - Certain project actions evaluated under this chapter by a city or town planning under RCW  36.70A.040—When exempt from appeals under this chapter.
1. A project action pertaining to residential, multifamily, or mixed use development evaluated under this chapter by a city or town planning under RCW 36.70A.040 is exempt from appeals under this chapter on the basis of the evaluation of or impacts to transportation elements of the environment, so long as the project does not present significant adverse impacts to the state-owned transportation system as determined by the department of transportation and the project is:

   a. [Empty]

      i. Consistent with a locally adopted transportation plan; or

      ii. Consistent with the transportation element of a comprehensive plan; and

   b. [Empty]

      i. A project for which traffic or parking impact fees are imposed pursuant to RCW 82.02.050 through 82.02.090; or

      ii. A project for which traffic or parking impacts are expressly mitigated by an ordinance, or ordinances, of general application adopted by the city or town.

2. For purposes of this section, "impacts to transportation elements of the environment" include impacts to transportation systems; vehicular traffic; waterborne, rail, and air traffic; parking; movement or circulation of people or goods; and traffic hazards.

\[ [2019 c 348 § 6](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/2019-20/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/House/1923-S2.SL.pdf?cite=2019%20c%20348%20§%206); \]

## 43.21C.515 - Projects permitted pursuant to RCW  77.55.480—Not subject to RCW  43.21C.030(2). (Expires June 30, 2025.)
1. A project that receives a permit pursuant to RCW 77.55.480 is not subject to the requirements of RCW 43.21C.030(2).

2. This section expires June 30, 2025.

\[ [2021 c 75 § 3](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/2021-22/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/House/1382-S2.SL.pdf?cite=2021%20c%2075%20§%203); \]

## 43.21C.520 - Review of greenhouse gas emissions from a new or expanded facility.
The review under this chapter of greenhouse gas emissions from a new or expanded facility subject to the greenhouse gas emission reduction requirements of chapter 70A.65 RCW must occur consistent with RCW 70A.65.080(9).

\[ [2021 c 316 § 34](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/2021-22/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/Senate/5126-S2.SL.pdf?cite=2021%20c%20316%20§%2034); \]

## 43.21C.900 - Short title.
This chapter shall be known and may be cited as the "State Environmental Policy Act" or "SEPA".

\[ [1995 c 347 § 207](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/1995-96/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/House/1724-S.SL.pdf?cite=1995%20c%20347%20§%20207); [1971 ex.s. c 109 § 7](http://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1971ex1c109.pdf?cite=1971%20ex.s.%20c%20109%20§%207); \]

## 43.21C.911 - Section headings not part of law—1983 c 117.
Section headings as used in this act do not constitute any part of the law.

\[ [1983 c 117 § 14](http://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1983c117.pdf?cite=1983%20c%20117%20§%2014); \]

## 43.21C.912 - Applicability—1983 c 117.
Sections 3 and 4 of this act apply to agency decisions and to appeal proceedings prospectively only and not retrospectively. Sections 1, 5, 6, 7, and 8 of this act may be applied by agencies retrospectively.

\[ [1983 c 117 § 15](http://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1983c117.pdf?cite=1983%20c%20117%20§%2015); \]

## 43.21C.914 - Effective dates—1983 c 117.
1. Sections 1, 2, and 4 through 16 of this act are necessary for the immediate preservation of the public peace, health, and safety, the support of the state government and its existing public institutions, and shall take effect immediately [April 23, 1983].

2. Section 3 of this act shall take effect one hundred eighty days after the remainder of this act goes into effect under subsection (1) of this section.

\[ [1983 c 117 § 17](http://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1983c117.pdf?cite=1983%20c%20117%20§%2017); \]

