# 54.32 - Consolidation and annexation.
* [54.32.001 - Actions subject to review by boundary review board.](#5432001---actions-subject-to-review-by-boundary-review-board)
* [54.32.010 - Consolidation of districts—Property taxed—Boundaries enlarged.](#5432010---consolidation-of-districtsproperty-taxedboundaries-enlarged)
* [54.32.040 - Right of countywide utility district to acquire distribution properties.](#5432040---right-of-countywide-utility-district-to-acquire-distribution-properties)
## 54.32.001 - Actions subject to review by boundary review board.
Actions taken under chapter 54.32 RCW may be subject to potential review by a boundary review board under chapter 36.93 RCW.

\[ [1989 c 84 § 49](http://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1989c84.pdf?cite=1989%20c%2084%20§%2049); \]

## 54.32.010 - Consolidation of districts—Property taxed—Boundaries enlarged.
Two or more contiguous public utility districts may become consolidated into one public utility district after proceedings had as required by *sections 8909, 8910 and 8911, of Remington's Compiled Statutes of Washington, PROVIDED, That a ten percent petition shall be sufficient; and public utility districts shall be held to be municipal corporations within the meaning of said sections, and the commission shall be held to be the legislative body of the public utility district as the term legislative body is used in said sections: PROVIDED, That any such consolidation shall in nowise affect or impair the title to any property owned or held by any such public utility district, or in trust therefor, or any debts, demands, liabilities or obligations existing in favor of or against either of the districts so consolidated, or any proceeding then pending: PROVIDED, FURTHER, That no property within either of the former public utility districts shall ever be taxed to pay any of the indebtedness of either of the other such former districts.

The boundaries of any public utility district may be enlarged and new territory included therein, after proceedings had as required by **section 8894 of Remington's Compiled Statutes of Washington: PROVIDED, That a ten percent petition shall be sufficient; and public utility districts shall be held to be municipal corporations within the meaning of said section, and the commission shall be held to be the legislative body of the public utility district: PROVIDED, That no property within such territory so annexed shall ever be taxed to pay any portion of any indebtedness of such public utility district contracted prior to or existing at the date of such annexation.

In all cases wherein public utility districts of less area than an entire county desire to be consolidated with a public utility district including an entire county, and in all cases wherein it is desired to enlarge a public utility district including an entire county, by annexing a lesser area than an entire county, no election shall be required to be held in the district including an entire county.

\[ [1931 c 1 § 10](http://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1931c1.pdf?cite=1931%20c%201%20§%2010); RRS § 11614; \]

## 54.32.040 - Right of countywide utility district to acquire distribution properties.
Upon the formation of a countywide public utility district in any county such district shall have the right, in addition to any other right provided by law, to acquire by purchase or condemnation any electrical distribution properties in the county from any other public utility district or combination of public utility districts for a period of five years from the time of organization of said public utility district.

\[ [1951 c 272 § 2](http://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1951c272.pdf?cite=1951%20c%20272%20§%202); \]

