# 54.48 - Agreements between electrical public utilities and cooperatives.
* [54.48.010 - Definitions.](#5448010---definitions)
* [54.48.020 - Legislative declaration of policy.](#5448020---legislative-declaration-of-policy)
* [54.48.030 - Agreements between public utilities and cooperatives authorized—Boundaries—Extension procedures—Purchase or sale—Approval.](#5448030---agreements-between-public-utilities-and-cooperatives-authorizedboundariesextension-procedurespurchase-or-saleapproval)
* [54.48.040 - Cooperatives not to be classified as public utilities or under authority of utilities and transportation commission.](#5448040---cooperatives-not-to-be-classified-as-public-utilities-or-under-authority-of-utilities-and-transportation-commission)
## 54.48.010 - Definitions.
When used in this chapter:

1. "Public utility" means any privately owned public utility company engaged in rendering electric service to the public for hire, any public utility district engaged in rendering service to residential customers and any city or town engaged in the electric business.

2. "Cooperative" means any cooperative having authority to engage in the electric business.

\[ [1969 c 102 § 1](http://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1969c102.pdf?cite=1969%20c%20102%20§%201); \]

## 54.48.020 - Legislative declaration of policy.
The legislature hereby declares that the duplication of the electric lines and service of public utilities and cooperatives is uneconomical, may create unnecessary hazards to the public safety, discourages investment in permanent underground facilities, and is unattractive, and thus is contrary to the public interest and further declares that it is in the public interest for public utilities and cooperatives to enter into agreements for the purpose of avoiding or eliminating such duplication.

\[ [1969 c 102 § 2](http://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1969c102.pdf?cite=1969%20c%20102%20§%202); \]

## 54.48.030 - Agreements between public utilities and cooperatives authorized—Boundaries—Extension procedures—Purchase or sale—Approval.
In aid of the foregoing declaration of policy, any public utility and any cooperative is hereby authorized to enter into agreements with any one or more other public utility or one or more other cooperative for the designation of the boundaries of adjoining service areas which each such public utility or each such cooperative shall observe, for the establishment of procedures for orderly extension of service in adjoining areas not currently served by any such public utility or any such cooperative and for the acquisition or disposal by purchase or sale by any such public utility or any such cooperative of duplicating utility facilities, which agreements shall be for a reasonable period of time not in excess of twenty-five years: PROVIDED, That the participation in such agreement of any public utility which is an electrical company under RCW 80.04.010, excepting cities and towns, shall be approved by the Washington utilities and transportation commission.

\[ [1969 c 102 § 3](http://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1969c102.pdf?cite=1969%20c%20102%20§%203); \]

## 54.48.040 - Cooperatives not to be classified as public utilities or under authority of utilities and transportation commission.
Nothing herein shall be construed to classify a cooperative having authority to engage in the electric business as a public utility or to include cooperatives under the authority of the Washington utilities and transportation commission.

\[ [1969 c 102 § 4](http://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1969c102.pdf?cite=1969%20c%20102%20§%204); \]

