# 53.16 - Revision of commissioner districts.
* [53.16.015 - Redrawing commissioner district boundaries—Conditions.](#5316015---redrawing-commissioner-district-boundariesconditions)
* [53.16.020 - Notice of hearing on revision.](#5316020---notice-of-hearing-on-revision)
* [53.16.030 - Change of district boundaries—Effect on term of office.](#5316030---change-of-district-boundarieseffect-on-term-of-office)
## 53.16.015 - Redrawing commissioner district boundaries—Conditions.
The port commission of a port district that uses commissioner districts may redraw the commissioner district boundaries as provided in chapter 29A.76 RCW or RCW 29A.92.040 or 29A.92.110 at any time and submit the redrawn boundaries to the county auditor if the port district is not coterminous with a county that has the same number of county legislative authority districts as the port has port commissioners. The new commissioner districts shall be used at the next election at which a port commissioner is regularly elected that occurs at least one hundred eighty days after the redrawn boundaries have been submitted. Each commissioner district shall encompass as nearly as possible the same population.

\[ [2019 c 454 § 9](https://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/2019-20/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/Senate/5266-S.SL.pdf?cite=2019%20c%20454%20§%209); [2015 c 53 § 82](https://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/2015-16/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/House/1806-S.SL.pdf?cite=2015%20c%2053%20§%2082); [1994 c 223 § 90](https://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/1993-94/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/House/2278-S.SL.pdf?cite=1994%20c%20223%20§%2090); [1992 c 146 § 10](https://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/1991-92/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/House/1150-S.SL.pdf?cite=1992%20c%20146%20§%2010); \]

## 53.16.020 - Notice of hearing on revision.
The revision of boundary lines provided for in this chapter shall be made only at a meeting of the board of port commissioners with attendance of all of the members of the commission, which meeting shall be public, following notice of said meeting, and the purpose thereof published in a newspaper of general circulation within the port district, or, if there be no such newspaper published within the district, in a newspaper published at the county seat of the county in which such port district is located. Such notice shall be published not less than twice, the date of the first publication to be not less than fifteen nor more than twenty days prior to the date fixed for said hearing, and shall state the time, place and purpose of the hearing.

\[ [1933 c 145 § 3](https://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1933c145.pdf?cite=1933%20c%20145%20§%203); RRS § 9708-3; \]

## 53.16.030 - Change of district boundaries—Effect on term of office.
Any change of boundary lines provided for in this chapter shall not affect the term for which a commissioner shall hold office at the time the change is made. If the port district commission is redrawing the commissioner district boundaries pursuant to RCW 29A.92.040 or 29A.92.110, each commissioner position is subject to election at the next general election.

\[ [2019 c 454 § 10](https://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/2019-20/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/Senate/5266-S.SL.pdf?cite=2019%20c%20454%20§%2010); [1992 c 146 § 11](https://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/1991-92/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/House/1150-S.SL.pdf?cite=1992%20c%20146%20§%2011); [1933 c 145 § 4](https://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1933c145.pdf?cite=1933%20c%20145%20§%204); RRS § 9704-8; \]

