# 53.25 - Industrial development districts—Marginal lands.
* [53.25.010 - Marginal lands—Declaration of policies and purposes.](#5325010---marginal-landsdeclaration-of-policies-and-purposes)
* [53.25.020 - Marginal lands—Further declaration.](#5325020---marginal-landsfurther-declaration)
* [53.25.030 - "Marginal lands" defined.](#5325030---marginal-lands-defined)
* [53.25.040 - Industrial development districts authorized—Boundaries—Deletion of land area.](#5325040---industrial-development-districts-authorizedboundariesdeletion-of-land-area)
* [53.25.050 - Tax title lands may be conveyed to district.](#5325050---tax-title-lands-may-be-conveyed-to-district)
* [53.25.060 - Private lands may be conveyed to district—Cancellation of taxes.](#5325060---private-lands-may-be-conveyed-to-districtcancellation-of-taxes)
* [53.25.070 - Discharge of trust.](#5325070---discharge-of-trust)
* [53.25.080 - When lands revert to county.](#5325080---when-lands-revert-to-county)
* [53.25.090 - Conditions precedent to making improvements.](#5325090---conditions-precedent-to-making-improvements)
* [53.25.100 - Powers as to industrial development districts.](#5325100---powers-as-to-industrial-development-districts)
* [53.25.110 - Sale authorized in industrial development district.](#5325110---sale-authorized-in-industrial-development-district)
* [53.25.120 - Notice of hearing on sale—Hearing—Plans and specifications—Conditions—Devotion of property to public use.](#5325120---notice-of-hearing-on-salehearingplans-and-specificationsconditionsdevotion-of-property-to-public-use)
* [53.25.130 - Findings and determination—Record—Appeal.](#5325130---findings-and-determinationrecordappeal)
* [53.25.140 - Action on determination—Sale by competitive bid or negotiation.](#5325140---action-on-determinationsale-by-competitive-bid-or-negotiation)
* [53.25.150 - Competitive bids—Conditions—Acceptance.](#5325150---competitive-bidsconditionsacceptance)
* [53.25.160 - Devotion of property to intended use—Remedy—Restraint on alienation.](#5325160---devotion-of-property-to-intended-useremedyrestraint-on-alienation)
* [53.25.170 - Covenant running with the land—Forfeiture.](#5325170---covenant-running-with-the-landforfeiture)
* [53.25.190 - Eminent domain.](#5325190---eminent-domain)
* [53.25.200 - Advances of general fund moneys or credit.](#5325200---advances-of-general-fund-moneys-or-credit)
* [53.25.210 - Determination that land sought by eminent domain is marginal.](#5325210---determination-that-land-sought-by-eminent-domain-is-marginal)
* [53.25.900 - Repeal and saving.](#5325900---repeal-and-saving)
## 53.25.010 - Marginal lands—Declaration of policies and purposes.
It is hereby declared to be the public policy of the legislature of the state of Washington, that it is in the public interest to employ the power of eminent domain and advance and expend public moneys for the purposes herein contained, and to provide for means by which marginal area properties may be developed or redeveloped in accordance with the legislative policies hereinafter stated:

1. A sound development of the economic security of the peoples of the state of Washington is dependent upon proper development and redevelopment of marginal properties, and the general welfare of the inhabitants of the port districts in which they exist require the remedying of such injurious conditions marginal properties are now subjected to.

2. The development and redevelopment of such marginal area properties cannot be accomplished by private enterprise alone without public participation and assistance in the acquisition of land and planning and in the financing of land assembly in the work of clearance, development and redevelopment, and in the making of improvements necessary therefor.

3. To protect and promote sound development and redevelopment of marginal lands as hereinafter defined, and the general welfare of the inhabitants of the port districts in which they exist, to remedying such injurious conditions through the employment of all appropriate means.

4. That whenever the development or redevelopment of such marginal lands cannot be accomplished by private enterprise alone, without public participation and assistance in the acquisition of land and planning and in financing of land assembly in the work of clearance, development and redevelopment, and in the making of improvements necessary therefor, it is in the public interest to employ the power of eminent domain, to advance and expend public moneys for those purposes, and to provide for means by which such marginal lands may be developed or redeveloped.

5. That the development or redevelopment of such marginal lands and the provision of appropriate continuing land use constitute public uses and purposes for which public moneys may be advanced or expended and private property acquired, and are governmental functions and are of state concern in the interest of health, safety and welfare of the state of Washington, and of the communities in which such areas exist.

6. That the necessity in the public interest for the provision of this chapter is declared to be a matter of legislative determination.

\[ [1955 c 73 § 1](http://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1955c73.pdf?cite=1955%20c%2073%20§%201); \]

## 53.25.020 - Marginal lands—Further declaration.
It is further found and declared that:

1. The existence of such marginal lands characterized by any or all of such conditions constitutes a serious and growing menace which is condemned as injurious and inimical to the public health, safety, and welfare of the people of the communities in which they exist and of the people of the state.

2. Such marginal lands present difficulties and handicaps which are beyond remedy and control solely by regulatory processes in the exercise of the police power.

3. They contribute substantially and increasingly to the problems of, and necessitate excessive and disproportionate expenditures for, crime prevention, correction, prosecution, and punishment, the treatment of juvenile delinquency, the preservation of the public health and safety, and the maintaining of adequate police, fire and accident protection, and other public services and facilities.

4. This menace is becoming increasingly direct and substantial in its significance and effect.

5. The benefits which will result from the remedying of such conditions and the redevelopment of such marginal lands will accrue to all the inhabitants and property owners of the communities in which they exist.

6. Such conditions of marginal lands tend to further obsolescence, deterioration, and disuse because of the lack of incentive to the individual landowner and his or her inability to improve, modernize, or rehabilitate his or her property while the condition of the neighboring properties remains unchanged.

7. As a consequence the process of deterioration of such marginal lands frequently cannot be halted or corrected except by redeveloping the entire area, or substantial portions of it.

8. Such conditions of marginal lands are chiefly found in areas subdivided into small parcels, held in divided and widely scattered ownerships, frequently under defective titles, and in many such instances the private assembly of the land areas for redevelopment is so difficult and costly that it is uneconomic and as a practical matter impossible for owners to undertake because of lack of the legal power and excessive costs.

9. The remedying of such conditions may require the public acquisition at fair prices of adequate areas, the redevelopment of the areas suffering from such conditions under proper supervision, with appropriate planning, and continuing land use.

10. The development or redevelopment of land, or both, acquired under the authority of this chapter constitute a public use and are governmental functions, and that the sale or leasing of such land after the same has been developed or redeveloped is merely incidental to the accomplishment of the real or fundamental purpose, that is, to remove the condition which caused said property to be marginal property as in this chapter defined.

\[ [2010 c 8 § 16006](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/2009-10/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/Senate/6239-S.SL.pdf?cite=2010%20c%208%20§%2016006); [1955 c 73 § 2](http://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1955c73.pdf?cite=1955%20c%2073%20§%202); \]

## 53.25.030 - "Marginal lands" defined.
"Marginal lands" is defined and characterized by any one or more of the following described conditions:

1. An economic dislocation, deterioration, or disuse resulting from faulty planning.

2. The subdividing and sale of lots of irregular form and shape and inadequate size for proper usefulness and development.

3. The laying out of lots in disregard of the contours and other physical characteristics of the ground and surrounding conditions.

4. The existence of inadequate streets, open spaces, and utilities.

5. The existence of lots or other areas which are subject to being submerged by water.

6. By a prevalence of depreciated values, impaired investments, and social and economic maladjustment to such an extent that the capacity to pay taxes is reduced and tax receipts are inadequate for the cost of public services rendered.

7. In some parts of marginal lands, a growing or total lack of proper utilization of areas, resulting in a stagnant and unproductive condition of land potentially useful and valuable for contributing to the public health, safety and welfare.

8. In other parts of marginal lands, a loss of population and reduction of proper utilization of the area, resulting in its further deterioration and added costs to the taxpayer for the creation of new public facilities and services elsewhere.

9. Property of an assessed valuation of insufficient amount to permit the establishment of a local improvement district for the construction and installation of streets, walks, sewers, water and other utilities.

10. Lands within an industrial area which are not devoted to industrial use but which are necessary to industrial development within the industrial area.

\[ [1955 c 73 § 3](http://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1955c73.pdf?cite=1955%20c%2073%20§%203); \]

## 53.25.040 - Industrial development districts authorized—Boundaries—Deletion of land area.
1. A port commission may, after a public hearing thereon, of which at least ten days' notice must be published in a newspaper of general circulation in the port district, create industrial development districts within the district and define the boundaries thereof, if it finds that the creation of the industrial development district is proper and desirable in establishing and developing a system of harbor improvements and industrial development in the port district.

2. [Empty]

   a. The boundaries of an industrial development district created by subsection (1) of this section may be revised from time to time by resolution of the port commission, to delete land area therefrom, if the land area to be deleted was acquired by the port district with its own funds or by gift or transfer other than pursuant to RCW 53.25.050 or 53.25.060.

   b. As to any land area to be deleted under this subsection that was acquired or improved by the port district with funds obtained through RCW * 53.36.100 or 53.36.160, the port district must deposit funds equal to the fair market value of the lands and improvements into the fund for future use described in RCW * 53.36.100 or 53.36.160 and such funds are thereafter subject to RCW * 53.36.100 or 53.36.160. The fair market value of the land and improvements must be determined as of the effective date of the port commission action deleting the land from the industrial development district and must be determined by an average of at least two independent appraisals by professionally designated real estate appraisers or licensed real estate brokers. The funds must be deposited into the fund for future use described in *RCW 53.36.100 within ninety days of the effective date of the port commission action deleting the land area from the industrial district. Land areas deleted from an industrial development district under this subsection are not further subject to the provisions of this chapter. This subsection applies to presently existing and future industrial development districts. Land areas deleted from an industrial development district under this subsection that were included within such district for less than two years, if the port district acquired the land through condemnation or as a consequence of threatened condemnation, must be offered for sale, for cash, at the appraised price, to the former owner of the property from whom the district obtained title. Such offer must be made by certified or registered letter to the last known address of the former owner. The letter must include the appraised price of the property and notice that the former owner must respond in writing within thirty days or lose the right to purchase. If this right to purchase is exercised, the sale must be closed by midnight of the sixtieth day, including nonbusiness days, following close of the thirty-day period.

\[ [2015 c 135 § 2](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/2015-16/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/House/1337-S.SL.pdf?cite=2015%20c%20135%20§%202); [1989 c 167 § 1](http://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1989c167.pdf?cite=1989%20c%20167%20§%201); [1985 c 469 § 53](http://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1985c469.pdf?cite=1985%20c%20469%20§%2053); [1955 c 73 § 4](http://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1955c73.pdf?cite=1955%20c%2073%20§%204); [1943 c 166 § 1](http://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1943c166.pdf?cite=1943%20c%20166%20§%201); [1939 c 45 § 1](http://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1939c45.pdf?cite=1939%20c%2045%20§%201); Rem. Supp. 1943 § 9709-1; RCW  53.24.010; \]

## 53.25.050 - Tax title lands may be conveyed to district.
Any lands in an industrial development district acquired by the county by tax foreclosure, may, if the county commissioners deem the lands chiefly valuable for industrial development purposes, be conveyed to the port district. The lands shall be held in trust by the port district and may be managed, developed, leased, or sold by it as provided in this chapter.

From the proceeds of the sale or lease of the lands, the district shall first reimburse itself for any expense incurred by it in managing and developing the lands and any balance shall be paid to the county, which shall distribute it the same as general taxes collected in that year.

\[ [1955 c 73 § 5](http://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1955c73.pdf?cite=1955%20c%2073%20§%205); [1939 c 45 § 2](http://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1939c45.pdf?cite=1939%20c%2045%20§%202); RRS § 9709-2; RCW  53.24.020; \]

## 53.25.060 - Private lands may be conveyed to district—Cancellation of taxes.
With the approval of the county commissioners, any lands in an industrial development district, owned privately, which the port commission deems valuable for industrial development purposes, may be deeded to and accepted by the port district, subject to delinquent general taxes thereon. When the commission has recorded the deed and notified the county commissioners thereof, the county commissioners shall order all taxes assessed against the lands canceled and the county treasurer shall record the cancellation, and remove the lands from the tax rolls. Thereafter the lands shall be held in trust, managed, developed, leased, and sold by the district, and the proceeds therefrom disposed of in the same manner as hereinabove provided.

\[ [1955 c 73 § 6](http://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1955c73.pdf?cite=1955%20c%2073%20§%206); [1939 c 45 § 3](http://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1939c45.pdf?cite=1939%20c%2045%20§%203); RRS § 9709-3; RCW  53.24.030; \]

## 53.25.070 - Discharge of trust.
With the approval of the county commissioners, a port district may free any lands acquired by it pursuant to this chapter from the trust imposed upon it herein, by paying to the county the amount of the delinquent taxes against the land at the time the county acquired it by tax foreclosure, or the amount of the delinquent taxes against it when it was conveyed to the district by the private owner.

\[ [1955 c 73 § 7](http://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1955c73.pdf?cite=1955%20c%2073%20§%207); [1939 c 45 § 4](http://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1939c45.pdf?cite=1939%20c%2045%20§%204); RRS § 9709-4; RCW  53.24.040; \]

## 53.25.080 - When lands revert to county.
Ten years from the date of its acquisition, property acquired by a port district pursuant to this chapter shall revert to the county to be used the same as property acquired by tax foreclosure, and upon demand by the county commissioners the port commission shall convey the property to the county, unless before the expiration of the ten year period, the port district has adopted a comprehensive plan of harbor improvement which provides for the improvement of an industrial development district which includes such lands or the district has freed the land from the trust imposed upon it as provided in this chapter.

\[ [1955 c 73 § 8](http://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1955c73.pdf?cite=1955%20c%2073%20§%208); [1939 c 45 § 8](http://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1939c45.pdf?cite=1939%20c%2045%20§%208); RRS § 9709-8; RCW  53.24.050; \]

## 53.25.090 - Conditions precedent to making improvements.
No expenditure for improvement of property in an industrial development district, other than the expense of preparing and submitting a plan of improvement shall be made by a port district, and no property shall be acquired by it therefor except as provided for hereinbefore until it has been made a part of the comprehensive scheme of harbor improvements and industrial developments or amendments thereto.

That said comprehensive scheme or amendments thereto shall provide for the development or redevelopment of those marginal lands acquired and a provision for the continuing of the land uses which are hereby declared to constitute public uses and the purposes for which public moneys may be advanced and provide property acquired.

\[ [1955 c 73 § 9](http://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1955c73.pdf?cite=1955%20c%2073%20§%209); [1939 c 45 § 5](http://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1939c45.pdf?cite=1939%20c%2045%20§%205); RRS § 9709-5; RCW  53.24.060; \]

## 53.25.100 - Powers as to industrial development districts.
All port districts wherein industrial development districts have been established are authorized and empowered to acquire by purchase or condemnation or both, all lands, property and property rights necessary for the purpose of the development and improvement of such industrial development district and to exercise the right of eminent domain in the acquirement or damaging of all lands, property and property rights and the levying and collecting of assessments upon property for the payment of all damages and compensation in carrying out the provisions for which said industrial development district has been created; to develop and improve the lands within such industrial development district to make the same suitable and available for industrial uses and purposes; to dredge, bulkhead, fill, grade, and protect such property; to provide, maintain, and operate water, light, power and fire protection facilities and services, streets, roads, bridges, highways, waterways, tracks, and rail and water transfer and terminal facilities and other harbor and industrial improvements; to execute leases of such lands or property or any part thereof; to establish local improvement districts within such industrial development districts which may, but need not, be coextensive with the boundaries thereof, and to levy special assessments, under the mode of annual installments, over a period not exceeding ten years, on all property specially benefited by any local improvement, on the basis of special benefits, to pay in whole or in part the damages or costs of any improvement ordered in such local improvement district; to issue local improvement bonds in any such local improvement district; to be repaid by the collection of local improvement assessments; and generally to exercise with respect to and within such industrial development districts all the powers now or hereafter conferred by law upon port districts in counties with a population of one hundred twenty-five thousand or more: PROVIDED, That the exercise of powers hereby authorized and granted shall be in the manner now and hereafter provided by the laws of the state for the exercise of such powers by port districts under the general laws relating thereto insofar as the same shall not be inconsistent with this chapter.

\[ [1991 c 363 § 132](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/1991-92/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/House/1201-S.SL.pdf?cite=1991%20c%20363%20§%20132); [1955 c 73 § 10](http://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1955c73.pdf?cite=1955%20c%2073%20§%2010); [1939 c 45 § 6](http://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1939c45.pdf?cite=1939%20c%2045%20§%206); RRS § 9709-6; RCW  53.24.070; \]

## 53.25.110 - Sale authorized in industrial development district.
When a port commission deems it for the best interests of the district and the people thereof and in furtherance of its general plan of harbor improvement, or industrial development, or both, it may sell and convey any property or part thereof owned by it within an industrial district. This section shall not be limited by chapter 53.08 RCW, pertaining to powers of port districts.

\[ [1955 c 73 § 11](http://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1955c73.pdf?cite=1955%20c%2073%20§%2011); [1939 c 45 § 9](http://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1939c45.pdf?cite=1939%20c%2045%20§%209); RRS § 9709-9; RCW  53.28.010; \]

## 53.25.120 - Notice of hearing on sale—Hearing—Plans and specifications—Conditions—Devotion of property to public use.
The port commission shall give notice of the proposed sale by publication in a newspaper of general circulation in the county, and by posting in three public places in the port district at least ten days before the date fixed for the hearing thereon.

The notice shall describe the property to be sold and state that at the time and place specified therein, the commission will meet at its usual meeting place, designating it, to hear and determine the advisability of the sale.

The hearing shall be held not more than twenty days from the publication of notice. At the hearing the commission shall hear the reasons of any taxpayer in the port district, for or against the sale.

No sales shall be made, however, of the property of any industrial development district until the purchaser thereof shall have submitted to the port commission plans and specifications for the development of the property, and the plans and specifications shall be approved in writing before the property shall be conveyed, and the conditions upon which the properties are conveyed shall be set forth in the instrument conveying title thereof with the further condition that all of the conditions set forth shall be covenants running with the land. All properties acquired in the manner herein set forth shall be devoted to the public use herein provided for.

\[ [1985 c 469 § 54](http://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1985c469.pdf?cite=1985%20c%20469%20§%2054); [1963 c 138 § 1](http://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1963c138.pdf?cite=1963%20c%20138%20§%201); [1955 c 73 § 12](http://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1955c73.pdf?cite=1955%20c%2073%20§%2012); [1939 c 45 § 10](http://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1939c45.pdf?cite=1939%20c%2045%20§%2010); RRS § 9709-10; RCW  53.28.020; \]

## 53.25.130 - Findings and determination—Record—Appeal.
Within three days after the hearing the commission shall make its findings and determination on the advisability of making the sale and enter its determination in its records. Any aggrieved party may appeal the determination of the commission by filing appeal with the superior court of the county in which the district is located within twenty days of the entry of the determination but no appeal shall be allowed except on the grounds that the action of the commission was arbitrary, capricious, or unlawful.

\[ [1955 c 73 § 13](http://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1955c73.pdf?cite=1955%20c%2073%20§%2013); [1939 c 45 § 11](http://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1939c45.pdf?cite=1939%20c%2045%20§%2011); RRS § 9709-11; RCW  53.28.030; \]

## 53.25.140 - Action on determination—Sale by competitive bid or negotiation.
If the determination is against the sale, all proceedings thereon shall terminate. If the commission determines in favor of the sale by at least a two-thirds vote of the full commission, it shall in its discretion, either enter an order fixing a period, not less than twenty nor more than thirty days from the date of the order, during which bids will be received for the property or any part thereof, and give notice thereof in the same manner as for the hearing on the proposal to sell or negotiate the sale with an appropriate purchaser, provided that in any such negotiated sale the purchase price must not be less than the fair market value of the property which shall be determined by an average of at least two independent appraisals performed by licensed real estate brokers or professionally designated real estate appraisers as defined in *RCW 74.46.020. Whether the property is sold by competitive bidding or negotiation, other real property conveyed by the purchaser to the commission may constitute all or a portion of the consideration for the sale.

\[ [1984 c 195 § 1](http://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1984c195.pdf?cite=1984%20c%20195%20§%201); [1955 c 73 § 14](http://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1955c73.pdf?cite=1955%20c%2073%20§%2014); [1939 c 45 § 12](http://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1939c45.pdf?cite=1939%20c%2045%20§%2012); RRS § 9709-12; RCW  53.28.040; \]

## 53.25.150 - Competitive bids—Conditions—Acceptance.
If the commission chooses to sell the property through competitive bidding under RCW 53.25.140:

1. Bids may be submitted for the property or any part of it, shall state the use which the bidder intends to make of it, and the commission may require the successful bidder to file additional information as to the intended use, and may require of him or her security as assurance that the property will be used for that purpose;

2. All sales shall be made to the best bidder, and in determining the best bid, the commission may also consider the nature of the proposed use and the relation thereof to the improvement of the harbor and the business and facilities thereof;

3. Within thirty days after the last day for submitting bids, the commission shall decide which if any bids it accepts. All sales shall be made upon such terms and conditions as the commission may prescribe.

\[ [2010 c 8 § 16007](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/2009-10/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/Senate/6239-S.SL.pdf?cite=2010%20c%208%20§%2016007); [1984 c 195 § 2](http://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1984c195.pdf?cite=1984%20c%20195%20§%202); [1955 c 73 § 15](http://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1955c73.pdf?cite=1955%20c%2073%20§%2015); 1939 c 45 § 13, part; RRS § 9709-13, part; RCW  53.28.050; \]

## 53.25.160 - Devotion of property to intended use—Remedy—Restraint on alienation.
The purchaser shall, within one year from the date of purchase, devote the property to its intended use, or shall commence work on the improvements thereon to devote it to such use, and if he or she fails to do so, the port commission may cancel the sale and return the money paid on the purchase price, and title to the property shall revert to the district. This remedy shall be in addition to any other remedy under the terms of the sale. No purchaser shall transfer title to such property within one year from the date of purchase.

\[ [2010 c 8 § 16008](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/2009-10/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/Senate/6239-S.SL.pdf?cite=2010%20c%208%20§%2016008); [1955 c 73 § 16](http://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1955c73.pdf?cite=1955%20c%2073%20§%2016); 1939 c 45 § 13, part; RRS § 9709-13, part; RCW  53.28.060; \]

## 53.25.170 - Covenant running with the land—Forfeiture.
All sales made in accordance with the provisions of this chapter shall have incorporated in the instrument of conveyance of title the conditions of this chapter relating to the use of the land as a covenant running with the land. Any violation of such covenant shall result in a right by the commission, as grantee, to forfeit the land.

\[ [1955 c 73 § 17](http://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1955c73.pdf?cite=1955%20c%2073%20§%2017); \]

## 53.25.190 - Eminent domain.
All port districts of the state of Washington which have created or may hereafter create industrial development districts in the manner provided by law, in addition to all powers possessed by such port districts, be and are hereby granted power of eminent domain to acquire real property within the limits of such industrial development district which property is marginal lands as the term is herein defined. The exercise of the power granted in this section shall be exercised in the same manner and by the same procedure as in or may be provided by law for cities of the first class except insofar as such duties may be inconsistent with the provisions of this chapter and the duties devolving upon the city treasurer under said law be and the same are hereby imposed upon the county treasurer for the purposes of this chapter.

\[ [1955 c 73 § 19](http://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1955c73.pdf?cite=1955%20c%2073%20§%2019); \]

## 53.25.200 - Advances of general fund moneys or credit.
Port districts are hereby granted the power to advance their general fund moneys or credit, or both, without interest to accomplish the objects and purposes of this chapter, which fund shall be repaid from the sale or lease, or both, of such developed or redeveloped lands, provided, if the money advanced for such development or redevelopment was obtained from the sale of general obligation bonds of the port, then such advances shall bear the same rate of interest that said bonds bore.

\[ [1955 c 73 § 20](http://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1955c73.pdf?cite=1955%20c%2073%20§%2020); \]

## 53.25.210 - Determination that land sought by eminent domain is marginal.
The determination that property sought by eminent domain proceedings is marginal lands as herein defined is a judicial question, provided that a duly adopted resolution of the commissioners of the port district that the property sought is marginal lands as the term is herein defined, setting forth the characteristics of the lands sought to be acquired which constitutes the marginal lands as herein defined, shall be prima facie evidence that such land is marginal lands as defined in this chapter.

\[ [1955 c 73 § 21](http://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1955c73.pdf?cite=1955%20c%2073%20§%2021); \]

## 53.25.900 - Repeal and saving.
Chapter 53.24 RCW and chapter 53.28 RCW and chapter 45, Laws of 1939, as last amended by section 1, chapter 166, Laws of 1943 are repealed: PROVIDED, That nothing herein contained shall be construed as affecting any existing right acquired under the provisions of said act.

\[ [1955 c 73 § 22](http://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1955c73.pdf?cite=1955%20c%2073%20§%2022); \]

