# 53.49 - Disposition of funds on dissolution of certain districts.
* [53.49.010 - Port districts in counties with populations of from eight thousand to less than twelve thousand—Disposition of funds.](#5349010---port-districts-in-counties-with-populations-of-from-eight-thousand-to-less-than-twelve-thousanddisposition-of-funds)
* [53.49.020 - Port districts in counties with populations of from eight thousand to less than twelve thousand—Order to transfer funds.](#5349020---port-districts-in-counties-with-populations-of-from-eight-thousand-to-less-than-twelve-thousandorder-to-transfer-funds)
## 53.49.010 - Port districts in counties with populations of from eight thousand to less than twelve thousand—Disposition of funds.
Whenever any port district located in any county with a population of from eight thousand to less than twelve thousand shall be dissolved and disestablished or is about to be dissolved and disestablished and any sums of money remain in any of its funds, the port commissioners are authorized and directed to apply by petition, which may be filed without fee, to the superior court of such county for an order authorizing the transfer of such funds to the school district fund or if there be more than one such district, the school district funds of all districts, which are located within the boundaries of such port district.

\[ [1991 c 363 § 134](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/1991-92/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/House/1201-S.SL.pdf?cite=1991%20c%20363%20§%20134); [1943 c 282 § 1](http://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1943c282.pdf?cite=1943%20c%20282%20§%201); Rem. Supp. 1943 § 9718-10; \]

## 53.49.020 - Port districts in counties with populations of from eight thousand to less than twelve thousand—Order to transfer funds.
The superior court of any such county shall enter his or her order authorizing such transfer of funds if he or she is satisfied, after hearing the petition therefor, that the port district is dissolved and disestablished or is about to be dissolved and disestablished and that no obligations of the port district remain unpaid. The court shall equitably divide such sums of money between school districts if there be more than one district involved.

\[ [2010 c 8 § 16019](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/2009-10/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/Senate/6239-S.SL.pdf?cite=2010%20c%208%20§%2016019); [1943 c 282 § 2](http://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1943c282.pdf?cite=1943%20c%20282%20§%202); Rem. Supp. 1943 § 9718-11; \]

