[wa-law.org](/) > [bill](/bill/) > [2025-26](/bill/2025-26/) > [SB 6083](/bill/2025-26/sb/6083/) > [Original Bill](/bill/2025-26/sb/6083/1/)

# SB 6083 - Restitution/postsecondary

[Source](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/2025-26/Pdf/Bills/Senate%20Bills/6083.pdf)

## Section 1
The legislature finds that a threat to the public safety and welfare exists due to recent actions by organized groups under the guise of political speech, acts of vandalism and violence have occurred, which impact the health, safety, and welfare of citizens of the state. While the legislature applauds and affirms the constitutional rights of peaceful protesters, it has become necessary to protect the property and persons of its citizens. In furtherance of this goal, the state of Washington finds it is necessary to amend when a court may waive restitution, specifically when restitution is owed to a postsecondary institution.

## Section 2
1. All court-ordered restitution obligations that are ordered as a result of a conviction for a criminal offense in a court of limited jurisdiction may be enforced in the same manner as a judgment in a civil action by the party or entity to whom the legal financial obligation is owed. The judgment and sentence must identify the party or entity to whom restitution is owed so that the state, party, or entity may enforce the judgment.

2. At any time, including at sentencing, the court may determine that the offender is not required to pay, or may relieve the offender of the requirement to pay, full or partial restitution and accrued interest on restitution where the entity to whom restitution is owed is an insurer or state agency, except for restitution owed to the department of labor and industries under chapter 7.68 RCW and postsecondary institutions as defined in RCW 28B.10.016, if the court finds that the offender does not have the current or likely future ability to pay. A person does not have the current ability to pay if the person is indigent as defined in RCW 10.01.160(3). For the purposes of this subsection, the terms "insurer" and "state agency" have the same meanings as provided in RCW 9.94A.750(3).

3. All court-ordered restitution obligations may be enforced at any time during the 10-year period following the offender's release from total confinement or within 10 years of entry of the judgment and sentence, whichever period is longer. Prior to the expiration of the initial 10-year period, the court may extend the criminal judgment an additional 10 years for payment of court-ordered restitution only if the court finds that the offender has not made a good faith attempt to pay.

4. The party or entity to whom the court-ordered restitution obligation is owed may utilize any other remedies available to the party or entity to collect the court-ordered financial obligation.

5. Nothing in this section may be construed to deprive the court of the authority to determine whether the offender's failure to pay the legal financial obligation constitutes a violation of a condition of probation or to impose a sanction upon the offender if such a violation is found.

## Section 3
This section applies to offenses committed after July 1, 1985.

1. When restitution is ordered, the court shall determine the amount of restitution due at the sentencing hearing or within 180 days except as provided in subsection (7) of this section. The court may continue the hearing beyond the 180 days for good cause. The court shall then set a minimum monthly payment that the offender is required to make towards the restitution that is ordered. The court shall not issue any order that postpones the commencement of restitution payments until after the offender is released from total confinement. The court should take into consideration the total amount of the restitution owed, the offender's present, past, and future ability to pay, as well as any assets that the offender may have. An offender's inability to make restitution payments while in total confinement may not be the basis for a violation of his or her sentence unless his or her inability to make payments resulted from a refusal to accept an employment offer to a class I or class II job or a termination for cause from such a job.

2. During the period of supervision, the community corrections officer may examine the offender to determine if there has been a change in circumstances that warrants an amendment of the monthly payment schedule. The community corrections officer may recommend a change to the schedule of payment and shall inform the court of the recommended change and the reasons for the change. The sentencing court may then reset the monthly minimum payments based on the report from the community corrections officer of the change in circumstances.

3. [Empty]

    a. Except as provided in subsection (6) of this section, restitution ordered by a court pursuant to a criminal conviction shall be based on easily ascertainable damages for injury to or loss of property, actual expenses incurred for treatment for injury to persons, and lost wages resulting from injury. Restitution shall not include reimbursement for damages for mental anguish, pain and suffering, or other intangible losses, but may include the costs of counseling reasonably related to the offense. The amount of restitution shall not exceed double the amount of the offender's gain or the victim's loss from the commission of the crime.

    b. At any time, including at sentencing, the court may determine that the offender is not required to pay, or may relieve the offender of the requirement to pay, full or partial restitution and accrued interest on restitution where the entity to whom restitution is owed is an insurer or state agency, except for restitution owed to the department of labor and industries under chapter 7.68 RCW and postsecondary institutions as defined in RCW 28B.10.016, if the court finds that the offender does not have the current or likely future ability to pay. A person does not have the current ability to pay if the person is indigent as defined in RCW 10.01.160(3). For the purposes of this subsection, the terms "insurer" and "state agency" have the same meanings as provided in RCW 9.94A.750(3).

4. For the purposes of this section, for an offense committed prior to July 1, 2000, the offender shall remain under the court's jurisdiction for a term of 10 years following the offender's release from total confinement or 10 years subsequent to the entry of the judgment and sentence, whichever period ends later. Prior to the expiration of the initial 10-year period, the superior court may extend jurisdiction under the criminal judgment an additional 10 years for payment of restitution. For an offense committed on or after July 1, 2000, the offender shall remain under the court's jurisdiction until the obligation is completely satisfied, regardless of the statutory maximum for the crime. The portion of the sentence concerning restitution may be modified as to amount, terms, and conditions during any period of time the offender remains under the court's jurisdiction, regardless of the expiration of the offender's term of community supervision and regardless of the statutory maximum sentence for the crime. The court may not reduce the total amount of restitution ordered because the offender may lack the ability to pay the total amount. The offender's compliance with the restitution shall be supervised by the department only during any period which the department is authorized to supervise the offender in the community under RCW 9.94A.728, 9.94A.501, or in which the offender is in confinement in a state correctional institution or a correctional facility pursuant to a transfer agreement with the department, and the department shall supervise the offender's compliance during any such period. The department is responsible for supervision of the offender only during confinement and authorized supervision and not during any subsequent period in which the offender remains under the court's jurisdiction. The county clerk is authorized to collect unpaid restitution at any time the offender remains under the jurisdiction of the court for purposes of his or her legal financial obligations.

5. Restitution shall be ordered whenever the offender is convicted of an offense which results in injury to any person or damage to or loss of property or as provided in subsection (6) of this section unless extraordinary circumstances exist which make restitution inappropriate in the court's judgment and the court sets forth such circumstances in the record. In addition, restitution shall be ordered to pay for an injury, loss, or damage if the offender pleads guilty to a lesser offense or fewer offenses and agrees with the prosecutor's recommendation that the offender be required to pay restitution to a victim of an offense or offenses which are not prosecuted pursuant to a plea agreement.

6. Restitution for the crime of rape of a child in the first, second, or third degree, in which the victim becomes pregnant, shall include: (a) All of the victim's medical expenses that are associated with the rape and resulting pregnancy; and (b) child support for any child born as a result of the rape if child support is ordered pursuant to a civil superior court or administrative order for support for that child. The clerk must forward any restitution payments made on behalf of the victim's child to the Washington state child support registry under chapter 26.23 RCW. Identifying information about the victim and child shall not be included in the order. The offender shall receive a credit against any obligation owing under the administrative or superior court order for support of the victim's child. For the purposes of this subsection, the offender shall remain under the court's jurisdiction until the offender has satisfied support obligations under the superior court or administrative order for the period provided in RCW 4.16.020 or a maximum term of 25 years following the offender's release from total confinement or 25 years subsequent to the entry of the judgment and sentence, whichever period is longer. The court may not reduce the total amount of restitution ordered because the offender may lack the ability to pay the total amount. The department shall supervise the offender's compliance with the restitution ordered under this subsection.

7. Regardless of the provisions of subsections (1) through (6) of this section, the court shall order restitution in all cases where the victim is entitled to benefits under the crime victims' compensation act, chapter 7.68 RCW. If the court does not order restitution and the victim of the crime has been determined to be entitled to benefits under the crime victims' compensation act, the department of labor and industries, as administrator of the crime victims' compensation program, may petition the court within one year of entry of the judgment and sentence for entry of a restitution order. Upon receipt of a petition from the department of labor and industries, the court shall hold a restitution hearing and shall enter a restitution order.

8. In addition to any sentence that may be imposed, an offender who has been found guilty of an offense involving fraud or other deceptive practice or an organization which has been found guilty of any such offense may be ordered by the sentencing court to give notice of the conviction to the class of persons or to the sector of the public affected by the conviction or financially interested in the subject matter of the offense by mail, by advertising in designated areas or through designated media, or by other appropriate means.

9. This section does not limit civil remedies or defenses available to the victim, survivors of the victim, or offender including support enforcement remedies for support ordered under subsection (6) of this section for a child born as a result of a rape of a child victim. The court shall identify in the judgment and sentence the victim or victims entitled to restitution and what amount is due each victim. The state or victim may enforce the court-ordered restitution in the same manner as a judgment in a civil action. Restitution collected through civil enforcement must be paid through the registry of the court and must be distributed proportionately according to each victim's loss when there is more than one victim.

10. If a person has caused a victim to lose money or property through the filing of a vehicle report of sale in which the designated buyer had no knowledge of the vehicle transfer or the fraudulent filing of the report of sale, upon conviction or when the offender pleads guilty and agrees with the prosecutor's recommendation that the offender be required to pay restitution to a victim, the court may order the defendant to pay an amount, fixed by the court, not to exceed double the amount of the defendant's gain or victim's loss from the filing of the vehicle report of sale in which the designated buyer had no knowledge of the vehicle transfer or the fraudulent filing of the report of sale. Such an amount may be used to provide restitution to the victim at the order of the court. It is the duty of the prosecuting attorney to investigate the alternative of restitution, and to recommend it to the court, when the prosecuting attorney believes that restitution is appropriate and feasible. If the court orders restitution, the court must make a finding as to the amount of the victim's loss due to the filing of the report of sale in which the designated buyer had no knowledge of the vehicle transfer or the fraudulent filing of the report of sale, and if the record does not contain sufficient evidence to support such finding, the court may conduct a hearing upon the issue. For purposes of this section, "loss" refers to the amount of money or the value of property or services lost.

## Section 4
1. Whenever any person is convicted of any crime except murder, burglary in the first degree, arson in the first degree, robbery, rape of a child, or rape, the superior court may, in its discretion, at the time of imposing sentence upon such person, direct that such sentence be stayed and suspended until otherwise ordered by the superior court, and, upon such terms as the superior court may determine, that the sentenced person be placed under the charge of:

    a. A community corrections officer employed by the department of corrections, if the person is subject to supervision under RCW 9.94A.501 or 9.94A.5011; or

    b. A probation officer employed or contracted for by the county, if the county has elected to assume responsibility for the supervision of superior court misdemeanant probationers.

2. As a condition to suspension of sentence, the superior court may require the convicted person to make such monetary payments, on such terms as the superior court deems appropriate under the circumstances, as are necessary: (a) To comply with any order of the court for the payment of family support; (b) to make restitution to any person or persons who may have suffered loss or damage by reason of the commission of the crime in question or when the offender pleads guilty to a lesser offense or fewer offenses and agrees with the prosecutor's recommendation that the offender be required to pay restitution to a victim of an offense or offenses which are not prosecuted pursuant to a plea agreement; (c) to pay any fine imposed and not suspended and the court or other costs incurred in the prosecution of the case, including reimbursement of the state for costs of extradition if return to this state by extradition was required; and (d) to contribute to a county or interlocal drug fund.

3. At any time, including at sentencing, the court may determine that the offender is not required to pay, or may relieve the offender of the requirement to pay, full or partial restitution and accrued interest on restitution where the entity to whom restitution is owed is an insurer or a state agency, except for restitution owed to the department of labor and industries under chapter 7.68 RCW and postsecondary institutions as defined in RCW 28B.10.016, if the court finds that the offender does not have the current or likely future ability to pay. A person does not have the current ability to pay if the person is indigent as defined in RCW 10.01.160(3). For the purposes of this subsection, the terms "insurer" and "state agency" have the same meanings as provided in RCW 9.94A.750(3).

4. As a condition of the suspended sentence, the superior court may order the probationer to report to the secretary of corrections or such officer as the secretary may designate and as a condition of the probation to follow the instructions of the secretary. If the county legislative authority has elected to assume responsibility for the supervision of superior court misdemeanant probationers within its jurisdiction, the superior court misdemeanant probationer shall report to a probation officer employed or contracted for by the county. In cases where a superior court misdemeanant probationer is sentenced in one county, but resides within another county, there must be provisions for the probationer to report to the agency having supervision responsibility for the probationer's county of residence.

5. If restitution to the victim has been ordered under subsection (2)(b) of this section and the superior court has ordered supervision, the officer supervising the probationer shall make a reasonable effort to ascertain whether restitution has been made as ordered. If the superior court has ordered supervision and restitution has not been made, the officer shall inform the prosecutor of that violation of the terms of the suspended sentence not less than three months prior to the termination of the suspended sentence.

## Section 5
1. [Empty]

    a. Except as provided in (b) of this subsection in granting probation, the superior court may suspend the imposition or the execution of the sentence and may direct that the suspension may continue upon such conditions and for such time as it shall designate, not exceeding the maximum term of sentence or two years, whichever is longer.

    b. For a defendant sentenced for a domestic violence offense, or under RCW 46.61.5055, the superior court may suspend the imposition or the execution of the sentence and may direct that the suspension continue upon such conditions and for such time as the court shall designate, not to exceed five years. The court shall have continuing jurisdiction and authority to suspend the execution of all or any part of the sentence upon stated terms, including installment payment of fines. A defendant who has been sentenced, and who then fails to appear for any hearing to address the defendant's compliance with the terms of probation when ordered to do so by the court shall have the term of probation tolled until such time as the defendant makes his or her presence known to the court on the record. Any time before entering an order terminating probation, the court may modify or revoke its order suspending the imposition or execution of the sentence if the defendant violates or fails to carry out any of the conditions of the suspended sentence.

2. In the order granting probation and as a condition thereof, the superior court may in its discretion imprison the defendant in the county jail for a period not exceeding one year and may fine the defendant any sum not exceeding the statutory limit for the offense committed, and court costs. As a condition of probation, the superior court may require the defendant to make such monetary payments, on such terms as it deems appropriate under the circumstances, as are necessary: (a) To comply with any order of the court for the payment of family support; (b) to make restitution to any person or persons who may have suffered loss or damage by reason of the commission of the crime in question or when the offender pleads guilty to a lesser offense or fewer offenses and agrees with the prosecutor's recommendation that the offender be required to pay restitution to a victim of an offense or offenses which are not prosecuted pursuant to a plea agreement; (c) to pay such fine as may be imposed and court costs, including reimbursement of the state for costs of extradition if return to this state by extradition was required; (d) following consideration of the financial condition of the person subject to possible electronic monitoring, to pay for the costs of electronic monitoring if that monitoring was required by the court as a condition of release from custody or as a condition of probation; (e) to contribute to a county or interlocal drug fund; and (f) to make restitution to a public agency for the costs of an emergency response under RCW 38.52.430, and may require bonds for the faithful observance of any and all conditions imposed in the probation.

3. The superior court shall order restitution in all cases where the victim is entitled to benefits under the crime victims' compensation act, chapter 7.68 RCW. If the superior court does not order restitution and the victim of the crime has been determined to be entitled to benefits under the crime victims' compensation act, the department of labor and industries, as administrator of the crime victims' compensation program, may petition the superior court within one year of imposition of the sentence for entry of a restitution order. Upon receipt of a petition from the department of labor and industries, the superior court shall hold a restitution hearing and shall enter a restitution order.

4. At any time, including at sentencing, the court may determine that the offender is not required to pay, or may relieve the offender of the requirement to pay, full or partial restitution and accrued interest on restitution where the entity to whom restitution is owed is an insurer or a state agency, except for restitution owed to the department of labor and industries under chapter 7.68 RCW and postsecondary institutions as defined in RCW 28B.10.016, if the court finds that the offender does not have the current or likely future ability to pay. A person does not have the current ability to pay if the person is indigent as defined in RCW 10.01.160(3). For the purposes of this subsection, the terms "insurer" and "state agency" have the same meanings as provided in RCW 9.94A.750(3).

5. In granting probation, the superior court may order the probationer to report to the secretary of corrections or such officer as the secretary may designate and as a condition of the probation to follow the instructions of the secretary for up to twelve months. If the county legislative authority has elected to assume responsibility for the supervision of superior court misdemeanant probationers within its jurisdiction, the superior court misdemeanant probationer shall report to a probation officer employed or contracted for by the county. In cases where a superior court misdemeanant probationer is sentenced in one county, but resides within another county, there must be provisions for the probationer to report to the agency having supervision responsibility for the probationer's county of residence.

6. If the probationer has been ordered to make restitution and the superior court has ordered supervision, the officer supervising the probationer shall make a reasonable effort to ascertain whether restitution has been made. If the superior court has ordered supervision and restitution has not been made as ordered, the officer shall inform the prosecutor of that violation of the terms of probation not less than three months prior to the termination of the probation period. The secretary of corrections will promulgate rules and regulations for the conduct of the person during the term of probation. For defendants found guilty in district court, like functions as the secretary performs in regard to probation may be performed by probation officers employed for that purpose by the county legislative authority of the county wherein the court is located.

7. The provisions of RCW 9.94A.501 and 9.94A.5011 apply to sentences imposed under this section.

8. For purposes of this section, "domestic violence" means the same as in RCW 10.99.020.
