# 70.320 - Service coordination organizations—Accountability measures.
* [70.320.010 - Definitions.](#70320010---definitions)
* [70.320.020 - Contract performance measures developed under RCW  70.320.030 based on outcomes—Integration.](#70320020---contract-performance-measures-developed-under-rcw--70320030-based-on-outcomesintegration)
* [70.320.030 - Adoption of performance measures.](#70320030---adoption-of-performance-measures)
* [70.320.040 - Contract requirements.](#70320040---contract-requirements)
* [70.320.050 - Report to the legislature.](#70320050---report-to-the-legislature)
* [70.320.060 - Civil actions—Outcomes and performance measures do not establish a standard of care.](#70320060---civil-actionsoutcomes-and-performance-measures-do-not-establish-a-standard-of-care)
* [70.320.070 - Record retention—Requirements.](#70320070---record-retentionrequirements)
## 70.320.010 - Definitions.
The definitions in this section apply throughout this chapter unless the context clearly requires otherwise.

1. "Authority" means the health care authority.

2. "Department" means the department of social and health services.

3. "Emerging best practice" or "promising practice" means a program or practice that, based on statistical analyses or a well-established theory of change, shows potential for meeting the evidence-based or research-based criteria, which may include the use of a program that is evidence-based for outcomes other than those listed in this section.

4. "Evidence-based" means a program or practice that has been tested in heterogeneous or intended populations with multiple randomized, or statistically controlled evaluations, or both; or one large multiple site randomized, or statistically controlled evaluation, or both, where the weight of the evidence from a systemic review demonstrates sustained improvements in at least one outcome. "Evidence-based" also means a program or practice that can be implemented with a set of procedures to allow successful replication in Washington and, when possible, is determined to be cost-beneficial.

5. "Research-based" means a program or practice that has been tested with a single randomized, or statistically controlled evaluation, or both, demonstrating sustained desirable outcomes; or where the weight of the evidence from a systemic review supports sustained outcomes as described in this subsection but does not meet the full criteria for evidence-based.

6. "Service coordination organization" or "service contracting entity" means the authority and department, or an entity that may contract with the state to provide, directly or through subcontracts, a comprehensive delivery system of medical, behavioral, long-term care, or social support services, including entities such as managed care organizations that provide medical services to clients under chapter 74.09 RCW and RCW 71.24.380, and area agencies on aging providing case management services under chapter 74.39A RCW.

\[ [2019 c 325 § 5023](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/2019-20/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/Senate/5432-S2.SL.pdf?cite=2019%20c%20325%20§%205023); [2014 c 225 § 73](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/2013-14/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/Senate/6312-S2.SL.pdf?cite=2014%20c%20225%20§%2073); [2013 c 320 § 1](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/2013-14/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/House/1519-S.SL.pdf?cite=2013%20c%20320%20§%201); \]

## **70.320.020 - Contract performance measures developed under RCW  70.320.030 based on outcomes—Integration.**
1. The authority and the department shall base contract performance measures developed under RCW 70.320.030 on the following outcomes when contracting with service contracting entities: Improvements in client health status and wellness; increases in client participation in meaningful activities; reductions in client involvement with criminal justice systems; reductions in avoidable costs in hospitals, emergency rooms, crisis services, and jails and prisons; increases in stable housing in the community; improvements in client satisfaction with quality of life; and reductions in population-level health disparities.

2. The performance measures must demonstrate the manner in which the following principles are achieved within each of the outcomes under subsection (1) of this section:

    a. Maximization of the use of evidence-based practices will be given priority over the use of research-based and promising practices, and research-based practices will be given priority over the use of promising practices. The agencies will develop strategies to identify programs that are effective with ethnically diverse clients and to consult with tribal governments, experts within ethnically diverse communities and community organizations that serve diverse communities;

    b. The maximization of the client's independence, recovery, and employment;

    c. The maximization of the client's participation in treatment decisions; and

    d. The collaboration between consumer-based support programs in providing services to the client.

3. In developing performance measures under RCW 70.320.030, the authority and the department shall consider expected outcomes relevant to the general populations that each agency serves. The authority and the department may adapt the outcomes to account for the unique needs and characteristics of discrete subcategories of populations receiving services, including ethnically diverse communities.

4. The authority and the department shall coordinate the establishment of the expected outcomes and the performance measures between each agency as well as each program to identify expected outcomes and performance measures that are common to the clients enrolled in multiple programs and to eliminate conflicting standards among the agencies and programs.

5. [Empty]

    a. The authority and the department shall establish timelines and mechanisms for service contracting entities to report data related to performance measures and outcomes, including phased implementation of public reporting of outcome and performance measures in a form that allows for comparison of performance measures and levels of improvement between geographic regions of Washington.

    b. The authority and the department may not release any public reports of client outcomes unless the data has been deidentified and aggregated in such a way that the identity of individual clients cannot be determined through directly identifiable data or the combination of multiple data elements.

6. [Empty]

    a. The performance measures coordinating committee must establish: (i) A performance measure to be integrated into the statewide common measure set which tracks effective integration practices of behavioral health services in primary care settings;  (ii) performance measures which track rates of criminal justice system involvement among **medical assistance** clients with an identified behavioral health need including, but not limited to, rates of arrest and incarceration**; and (iii) performance measures which track rates of homelessness and housing instability among medical assistance clients**. The authority must set improvement targets related to these measures.

    b. The performance measures coordinating committee must report to the governor and appropriate committees of the legislature regarding the implementation of this subsection by July 1, 2022.

    c. For purposes of establishing performance measures as specified in (a)(ii) of this subsection, the performance measures coordinating committee shall convene a work group of stakeholders including the authority, medicaid managed care organizations, the department of corrections, and others with expertise in criminal justice and behavioral health. The work group shall review current performance measures that have been adopted in other states or nationally to inform this effort.

7. The authority must report to the governor and appropriate committees of the legislature **:**

    a. **By** October 1, 2022, regarding options and recommendations for integrating value-based purchasing terms and a performance improvement project into managed health care contracts relating to the criminal justice outcomes specified under subsection (1) of this section**;**

    b. **By July 1, 2024, regarding options and recommendations for integrating value-based purchasing terms and to integrate a collective performance improvement project into managed health care contracts related to increasing stable housing in the community outcomes specified under subsection (1) of this section**.

## 70.320.030 - Adoption of performance measures.
1. The authority shall adopt performance measures to determine whether service contracting entities are achieving the outcomes described in RCW 70.320.020 and 41.05.690 for clients enrolled in medical managed care programs operated according to Title XIX or XXI of the federal social security act.

2. The authority shall adopt performance measures to determine whether service contracting entities are achieving the outcomes described in RCW 70.320.020 for clients receiving mental health, long-term care, or chemical dependency services.

\[ [2021 c 267 § 3](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/2021-22/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/Senate/5157-S.SL.pdf?cite=2021%20c%20267%20§%203); [2015 c 209 § 1](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/2015-16/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/Senate/5147-S.SL.pdf?cite=2015%20c%20209%20§%201); [2013 c 320 § 3](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/2013-14/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/House/1519-S.SL.pdf?cite=2013%20c%20320%20§%203); \]

## 70.320.040 - Contract requirements.
By July 1, 2015, the authority and the department shall require that contracts with service coordination organizations include provisions requiring:

1. The adoption of the outcomes and performance measures developed under this chapter and RCW 41.05.690 and mechanisms for reporting data to support each of the outcomes and performance measures; and

2. That an initial health screen be conducted for new enrollees pursuant to the terms and conditions of the contract.

\[ [2015 c 209 § 2](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/2015-16/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/Senate/5147-S.SL.pdf?cite=2015%20c%20209%20§%202); [2013 c 320 § 4](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/2013-14/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/House/1519-S.SL.pdf?cite=2013%20c%20320%20§%204); \]

## 70.320.050 - Report to the legislature.
1. By December 1, 2014, the department and the authority shall report jointly to the legislature on the expected outcomes and the performance measures. The report must identify the performance measures and the expected outcomes established for each program, the relationship between the performance measures and expected improvements in client outcomes, mechanisms for reporting outcomes and measuring performance, and options for applying the performance measures and expected outcomes development process to other health and social service programs.

2. By December 1, 2016, and annually thereafter, the department and the authority shall report to the legislature on the incorporation of the performance measures into contracts with service coordination organizations and progress toward achieving the identified outcomes. The report shall include:

   a. The number of medicaid clients enrolled over the previous year;

   b. The number of enrollees who received a baseline health assessment over the previous year;

   c. An analysis of trends in health improvement for medicaid enrollees in accordance with the measure set established under *RCW 41.05.065; and

   d. Recommendations for improving the health of medicaid enrollees.

\[ [2015 c 209 § 3](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/2015-16/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/Senate/5147-S.SL.pdf?cite=2015%20c%20209%20§%203); [2013 c 320 § 5](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/2013-14/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/House/1519-S.SL.pdf?cite=2013%20c%20320%20§%205); \]

## 70.320.060 - Civil actions—Outcomes and performance measures do not establish a standard of care.
The outcomes and performance measures established pursuant to this chapter do not establish a standard of care in any civil action brought by a recipient of services. The failure of a service coordination organization to meet the outcomes and performance measures established pursuant to this chapter does not create civil liability on the part of the service coordination organization in a claim brought by a recipient of services.

\[ [2013 c 320 § 6](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/2013-14/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/House/1519-S.SL.pdf?cite=2013%20c%20320%20§%206); \]

## 70.320.070 - Record retention—Requirements.
The authority, the department, and service contracting entities shall establish record retention schedules for maintaining data reported by service contracting entities under RCW 70.320.020. For data elements related to the identity of individual clients, the schedules may not allow the retention of data for longer than required by law unless the authority, the department, or service contracting entities require the data for purposes contemplated by RCW 70.320.020 or to meet other service requirements. Regardless of how long data reported by service contracting entities under RCW 70.320.020 is kept, it must be protected in a way that prevents improper use or disclosure of confidential client information.

\[ [2014 c 225 § 109](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/2013-14/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/Senate/6312-S2.SL.pdf?cite=2014%20c%20225%20§%20109); \]

