# 19.192 - Proof of identity.
* [19.192.010 - Identification cards—Distinguishing official and not official proofs of identification—Penalties.](#19192010---identification-cardsdistinguishing-official-and-not-official-proofs-of-identificationpenalties)
* [19.192.020 - Verification of identity by merchant/retailer—Prohibition on verification void.](#19192020---verification-of-identity-by-merchantretailerprohibition-on-verification-void)
## 19.192.010 - Identification cards—Distinguishing official and not official proofs of identification—Penalties.
1. Any person or entity, other than those listed in subsection (2) of this section, issuing an identification card that purports to identify the holder as a resident of this or any other state and that contains at least a name, photograph, and date of birth, must label the card "not official proof of identification" in fluorescent yellow ink, on the face of the card, and in not less than fourteen-point font. The background color of the card must be a color other than the color used for official Washington state driver's licenses and identicards.

2. This section does not apply to the following persons and entities:

   a. Department of licensing;

   b. Any federal, state, or local government agency;

   c. The Washington *state liquor control board;

   d. Private employers issuing cards identifying employees;

   e. Banks and credit card companies issuing credit, debit, or bank cards containing a person's photograph; and

   f. Retail or wholesale stores issuing membership cards containing a person's photograph.

3. Failure to comply with this section is a class 1 civil infraction.

\[ [1998 c 24 § 1](https://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/1997-98/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/House/1077-S.SL.pdf?cite=1998%20c%2024%20§%201); \]

## 19.192.020 - Verification of identity by merchant/retailer—Prohibition on verification void.
1. Any provision of a contract between a merchant or retailer and a credit or debit card issuer, financial institution, or other person that prohibits the merchant or retailer from verifying the identity of a customer who offers to pay for goods or services with a credit or debit card by requiring or requesting that the customer present additional identification is void for violation of public policy.

2. Nothing in this section shall be interpreted as: (a) Compelling merchants or retailers to verify identification; or (b) interfering with the ability of the owner or manager of a retail store or chain to make and enforce its own policies regarding verification of identification.

\[ [2003 c 89 § 2](https://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/2003-04/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/Senate/5720.SL.pdf?cite=2003%20c%2089%20§%202); \]

