# Second Substitute House Bill 1139 as Recommended by Appropriations

[Source](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/2021-22/Xml/Bills/House%20Bills/1139-S2.xml)
## Section 1
(1) The legislature recognizes that the United States environmental protection agency and centers for disease control and prevention acknowledge that there is no known safe level of lead in a child's blood. Even low levels of lead exposure can cause permanent cognitive, academic, and behavioral difficulties in children. The American academy of pediatrics recommends government action to ensure that the lead concentration in drinking water at schools does not exceed one part per billion.
(2) The legislature finds that the department of health sampled and tested drinking water outlets in 551 elementary schools between 2017 and 2020. 82 percent of these schools had lead contamination of five or more parts per billion in one or more drinking water outlets and 49 percent of these schools had lead contamination of 15 or more parts per billion in one or more drinking water outlets.
(3) The legislature acknowledges that the department of health was appropriated $1,000,000 in the 2019-2021 fiscal biennium to continue the testing for lead contamination in school drinking water. The legislature also finds that the office of the superintendent of public instruction was appropriated funds in the 2019-2021 fiscal biennium for the healthy kids/healthy schools initiative. Part of these funds are for the purpose of distributing grants to school districts for remediation of elevated lead levels in drinking water. The legislature encourages districts to apply for these grants when lead test results reveal elevated lead levels, which are lead levels above five parts per billion.
(4) The legislature acknowledges the historically inequitable distribution of lead exposure for communities of color and of low socioeconomic status and plans to make a priority the protection of children from the dangers of lead exposure through school drinking water. The legislature, therefore, intends to require that drinking water outlets in elementary and secondary school buildings built, or with all plumbing replaced, before 2016 be tested for the presence and level of lead contamination by June 30, 2026, and every five years thereafter. The legislature also intends to require that schools notify the school community of lead test results and develop action plans for remediation if test results exceed the health-based standard of five parts per billion.
(5) The legislature recognizes that the youngest children are the most vulnerable to lead exposure and that many of these children spend significant amounts of time at child care facilities.
(6) This act is named for the director of the Washington public interest research group who developed and advocated for this legislation before dying of cancer in 2019 and may be known as the Bruce Speight protect children from being exposed to lead in school drinking water act.

## Section 8
This act may be known and cited as the Bruce Speight protect children from being exposed to lead in school drinking water act.

## Section 9
If specific funding for the purposes of this act, referencing this act by bill or chapter number, is not provided by June 30, 2021, in the omnibus appropriations act, this act is null and void.
