# 27.18 - Interstate library compact.
* [27.18.010 - Definitions.](#2718010---definitions)
* [27.18.020 - Compact enacted—Provisions.](#2718020---compact-enactedprovisions)
* [27.18.030 - Compact administrator—Deputies—Library agreements, submittal.](#2718030---compact-administratordeputieslibrary-agreements-submittal)
* [27.18.040 - Compliance with tax and bonding laws enjoined.](#2718040---compliance-with-tax-and-bonding-laws-enjoined)
* [27.18.050 - Withdrawal—Compact administrator to send and receive notices.](#2718050---withdrawalcompact-administrator-to-send-and-receive-notices)
## 27.18.010 - Definitions.
As used in this chapter, except where the context otherwise requires:

1. "Compact" means the interstate library compact.

2. "Public library agency", with reference to this state, means the state library and any county or city library or any regional library, rural county library district library, island library district library, or intercounty rural library district library.

3. "State library agency", with reference to this state, means the commissioners of the state library.

\[ [1982 c 123 § 17](http://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1982c123.pdf?cite=1982%20c%20123%20§%2017); [1965 ex.s. c 93 § 1](http://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1965ex1c93.pdf?cite=1965%20ex.s.%20c%2093%20§%201); \]

## 27.18.020 - Compact enacted—Provisions.
The interstate library compact hereby is enacted into law and entered into by this state with all states legally joining therein in the form substantially as follows:

INTERSTATE LIBRARY COMPACT

ARTICLE I. POLICY AND PURPOSE

Because the desire for the services provided by libraries transcends governmental boundaries and can most effectively be satisfied by giving such services to communities and people regardless of jurisdictional lines, it is the policy of the states party to this compact to cooperate and share their responsibilities; to authorize cooperation and sharing with respect to those types of library facilities and services which can be more economically or efficiently developed and maintained on a cooperative basis; and to authorize cooperation and sharing among localities, states and others in providing joint or cooperative library services in areas where the distribution of population or of existing and potential library resources make the provision of library service on an interstate basis the most effective way of providing adequate and efficient service.

ARTICLE II. DEFINITIONS

As used in this compact:

a. "Public library agency" means any unit or agency of local or state government operating or having power to operate a library.

   b. "Private library agency" means any nongovernmental entity which operates or assumes a legal obligation to operate a library.

   c. "Library agreement" means a contract establishing an interstate library district pursuant to this compact or providing for the joint or cooperative furnishing of library services.

ARTICLE III. INTERSTATE LIBRARY DISTRICTS

   a. Any one or more public library agencies in a party state in cooperation with any public library agency or agencies in one or more other party states may establish and maintain an interstate library district. Subject to the provisions of this compact and any other laws of the party states which pursuant hereto remain applicable, such district may establish, maintain and operate some or all of the library facilities and services for the area concerned in accordance with the terms of a library agreement therefor. Any private library agency or agencies within an interstate library district may cooperate therewith, assume duties, responsibilities and obligations thereto, and receive benefits therefrom as provided in any library agreement to which such agency or agencies become party.

   b. Within an interstate library district, and as provided by a library agreement, the performance of library functions may be undertaken on a joint or cooperative basis or may be undertaken by means of one or more arrangements between or among public or private library agencies for the extension of library privileges to the use of facilities or services operated or rendered by one or more of the individual library agencies.

   c. If a library agreement provides for joint establishment, maintenance or operation of library facilities or services by an interstate library district, such district shall have power to do any one or more of the following in accordance with such library agreement:

1. Undertake, administer and participate in programs or arrangements for securing, lending or servicing books and other publications, any other materials suitable to be kept or made available by libraries, library equipment or for the dissemination of information about libraries, the value and significance of particular items therein, and the use thereof.

2. Accept for any of its purposes under this compact any and all donations, and grants of money, equipment, supplies, materials, and services, (conditional or otherwise), from any state or the United States or any subdivision or agency thereof, or interstate agency, or from any institution, person, firm or corporation, and receive, utilize and dispose of the same.

3. Operate mobile library units or equipment for the purpose of rendering bookmobile service within the district.

4. Employ professional, technical, clerical and other personnel, and fix terms of employment, compensation and other appropriate benefits; and where desirable, provide for the inservice training of such personnel.

5. Sue and be sued in any court of competent jurisdiction.

6. Acquire, hold, and dispose of any real or personal property or any interest or interests therein as may be appropriate to the rendering of library service.

7. Construct, maintain and operate a library, including any appropriate branches thereof.

8. Do such other things as may be incidental to or appropriate for the carrying out of any of the foregoing powers.

ARTICLE IV. INTERSTATE LIBRARY DISTRICTS,

GOVERNING BOARD

   a. An interstate library district which establishes, maintains or operates any facilities or services in its own right shall have a governing board which shall direct the affairs of the district and act for it in all matters relating to its business. Each participating public library agency in the district shall be represented on the governing board which shall be organized and conduct its business in accordance with provision therefor in the library agreement. But in no event shall a governing board meet less often than twice a year.

   b. Any private library agency or agencies party to a library agreement establishing an interstate library district may be represented on or advise with the governing board of the district in such manner as the library agreement may provide.

ARTICLE V. STATE LIBRARY AGENCY COOPERATION

Any two or more state library agencies of two or more of the party states may undertake and conduct joint or cooperative library programs, render joint or cooperative library services, and enter into and perform arrangements for the cooperative or joint acquisition, use, housing and disposition of items or collections of materials which, by reason of expense, rarity, specialized nature, or infrequency of demand therefor would be appropriate for central collection and shared use. Any such programs, services or arrangements may include provision for the exercise on a cooperative or joint basis of any power exercisable by an interstate library district and an agreement embodying any such program, service or arrangement shall contain provisions covering the subjects detailed in Article VI of this compact for interstate library agreements.

ARTICLE VI. LIBRARY AGREEMENTS

   a. In order to provide for any joint or cooperative undertaking pursuant to this compact, public and private library agencies may enter into library agreements. Any agreement executed pursuant to the provisions of this compact shall, as among the parties to the agreement:

1. Detail the specific nature of the services, programs, facilities, arrangements or properties to which it is applicable.

2. Provide for the allocation of costs and other financial responsibilities.

3. Specify the respective rights, duties, obligations and liabilities of the parties.

4. Set forth the terms and conditions for duration, renewal, termination, abrogation, disposal of joint or common property, if any, and all other matters which may be appropriate to the proper effectuation and performance of the agreement.

   b. No public or private library agency shall undertake to exercise itself, or jointly with any other library agency, by means of a library agreement any power prohibited to such agency by the constitution or statutes of its state.

   c. No library agreement shall become effective until filed with the compact administrator of each state involved, and approved in accordance with Article VII of this compact.

ARTICLE VII. APPROVAL OF LIBRARY AGREEMENTS

   a. Every library agreement made pursuant to this compact shall, prior to and as a condition precedent to its entry into force, be submitted to the attorney general of each state in which a public library agency party thereto is situated, who shall determine whether the agreement is in proper form and compatible with the laws of his state. The attorneys general shall approve any agreement submitted to them unless they shall find that it does not meet the conditions set forth herein and shall detail in writing addressed to the governing bodies of the public library agencies concerned the specific respects in which the proposed agreement fails to meet the requirements of law. Failure to disapprove an agreement submitted hereunder within ninety days of its submission shall constitute approval thereof.

   b. In the event that a library agreement made pursuant to this compact shall deal in whole or in part with the provision of services or facilities with regard to which an officer or agency of the state government has constitutional or statutory powers of control, the agreement shall, as a condition precedent to its entry into force, be submitted to the state officer or agency having such power of control and shall be approved or disapproved by him or it as to all matters within his or its jurisdiction in the same manner and subject to the same requirements governing the action of the attorneys general pursuant to paragraph (a) of this article. This requirement of submission and approval shall be in addition to and not in substitution for the requirement of submission to and approval by the attorneys general.

ARTICLE VIII. OTHER LAWS APPLICABLE

Nothing in this compact or in any library agreement shall be construed to supersede, alter or otherwise impair any obligation imposed on any library by otherwise applicable law, nor to authorize the transfer or disposition of any property held in trust by a library agency in a manner contrary to the terms of such trust.

ARTICLE IX. APPROPRIATIONS AND AID

   a. Any public library agency party to a library agreement may appropriate funds to the interstate library district established thereby in the same manner and to the same extent as to a library wholly maintained by it and, subject to the laws of the state in which such public library agency is situated, may pledge its credit in support of an interstate library district established by the agreement.

   b. Subject to the provisions of the library agreement pursuant to which it functions and the laws of the states in which such district is situated, an interstate library district may claim and receive any state and federal aid which may be available to library agencies.

ARTICLE X. COMPACT ADMINISTRATOR

Each state shall designate a compact administrator with whom copies of all library agreements to which his state or any public library agency thereof is party shall be filed. The administrator shall have such other powers as may be conferred upon him by the laws of his state and may consult and cooperate with the compact administrators of other party states and take such steps as may effectuate the purposes of this compact. If the laws of a party state so provide, such state may designate one or more deputy compact administrators in addition to its compact administrator.

ARTICLE XI. ENTRY INTO FORCE AND WITHDRAWAL

   a. This compact shall enter into force and effect immediately upon its enactment into law by any two states. Thereafter, it shall enter into force and effect as to any other state upon the enactment thereof by such state.

   b. This compact shall continue in force with respect to a party state and remain binding upon such state until six months after such state has given notice to each other party state of the repeal thereof. Such withdrawal shall not be construed to relieve any party to a library agreement entered into pursuant to this compact from any obligation of that agreement prior to the end of its duration as provided therein.

ARTICLE XII. CONSTRUCTION AND SEVERABILITY

This compact shall be liberally construed so as to effectuate the purposes thereof. The provisions of this compact shall be severable and if any phrase, clause, sentence or provision of this compact is declared to be contrary to the constitution of any party state or of the United States or the applicability thereof to any government, agency, person or circumstance is held invalid, the validity of the remainder of this compact and the applicability thereof to any government, agency, person or circumstance shall not be affected thereby. If this compact shall be held contrary to the constitution of any state party thereto, the compact shall remain in full force and effect as to the remaining states and in full force and effect as to the state affected as to all severable matters.

\[ [1965 ex.s. c 93 § 2](http://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1965ex1c93.pdf?cite=1965%20ex.s.%20c%2093%20§%202); \]

## 27.18.030 - Compact administrator—Deputies—Library agreements, submittal.
The state librarian shall be the compact administrator pursuant to Article X of the compact. The state librarian shall appoint one or more deputy compact administrators. Every library agreement made pursuant to Article VI of the compact shall, as a condition precedent to its entry into force, be submitted to the state librarian for his or her recommendations.

\[ [2011 c 336 § 705](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/2011-12/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/Senate/5045.SL.pdf?cite=2011%20c%20336%20§%20705); [1965 ex.s. c 93 § 3](http://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1965ex1c93.pdf?cite=1965%20ex.s.%20c%2093%20§%203); \]

## 27.18.040 - Compliance with tax and bonding laws enjoined.
No regional library, county library, rural county library district library, island library district library, intercounty rural library district library, or city library of this state shall be a party to a library agreement which provides for the construction or maintenance of a library pursuant to Article III, subdivision (c-7) of the compact, nor levy a tax or issue bonds to contribute to the construction or maintenance of such a library, except after compliance with any laws applicable to regional libraries, county libraries, rural county library district libraries, island library district libraries, intercounty rural library district libraries, or city libraries relating to or governing the levying of taxes or the issuance of bonds.

\[ [1982 c 123 § 18](http://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1982c123.pdf?cite=1982%20c%20123%20§%2018); [1965 ex.s. c 93 § 4](http://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1965ex1c93.pdf?cite=1965%20ex.s.%20c%2093%20§%204); \]

## 27.18.050 - Withdrawal—Compact administrator to send and receive notices.
In the event of withdrawal from the compact the compact administrator shall send and receive any notices required by Article XI(b) of the compact.

\[ [1965 ex.s. c 93 § 5](http://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1965ex1c93.pdf?cite=1965%20ex.s.%20c%2093%20§%205); \]

