[wa-law.org](/) > [bill](/bill/) > [2023-24](/bill/2023-24/) > [SB 6227](/bill/2023-24/sb/6227/) > [Session Law](/bill/2023-24/sb/6227/S.SL/)

# SB 6227 - Protection order/insanity

[Source](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/2023-24/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/Senate/6227-S.SL.pdf)

## Section 1
1. If a defendant is acquitted of a crime by reason of insanity, and it is found that he or she is not a substantial danger to other persons, and does not present a substantial likelihood of committing criminal acts jeopardizing public safety or security, unless kept under further control by the court or other persons or institutions, the court shall direct the defendant's release. If it is found that such defendant is a substantial danger to other persons, or presents a substantial likelihood of committing criminal acts jeopardizing public safety or security, unless kept under further control by the court or other persons or institutions, the court shall order his or her hospitalization, or any appropriate alternative treatment less restrictive than detention in a state mental hospital, pursuant to the terms of this chapter.

If it is found that such defendant is not a substantial danger to other persons, and does not present a substantial likelihood of committing criminal acts jeopardizing public safety or security, but that he or she is in need of control by the court or other persons or institutions, the court shall direct the defendant's conditional release.

2. [Empty]

    a. Upon placement of the defendant under control by the court or other persons and institutions or placement of the defendant on conditional release, or upon application by the prosecuting attorney at any subsequent time during which the court retains supervision of the defendant, the court may enter a separate no-contact order to protect any victim of the defendant's conduct in addition to the defendant's order of commitment. The maximum term of the no-contact order shall be the defendant's maximum term of commitment, or until the defendant's release under RCW 10.77.200, whichever comes sooner. The clerk's office shall provide a written certified copy of the no-contact order to the victim.

    b. The no-contact order shall contain the court's directives and shall state that a violation of the order is a criminal offense under chapter 7.105 RCW and will subject the person who violates the order to arrest, and that any assault, drive-by shooting, or reckless endangerment that is a violation of the order is a felony.

    c. Any willful violation of a no-contact order issued under this section is punishable under RCW 7.105.450.

    d. For the purpose of this subsection, "victim" has the same meaning as in RCW 9.94A.030.

3. Whenever an order is issued, modified, or terminated under this section, the clerk of the court shall forward a copy of the order on or before the next judicial day to the appropriate law enforcement agency specified in the order. Upon receipt of the copy of the order the law enforcement agency shall enter the order for one year or until the expiration date specified on the order into any computer-based criminal intelligence information system available in this state used by law enforcement agencies to list outstanding warrants. Entry into the computer-based criminal intelligence information system constitutes notice to all law enforcement agencies of the existence of the order. The order is fully enforceable in any jurisdiction in the state. Upon receipt of notice that an order has been terminated, the law enforcement agency shall remove the order from the computer-based criminal intelligence information system.

## Section 2
1. [Empty]

    a. Whenever a domestic violence protection order, a sexual assault protection order, a stalking protection order, or a vulnerable adult protection order is granted under this chapter, or an order is granted under chapter 9A.40, 9A.44, 9A.46, 9A.88, 9.94A, 10.77, 10.99, 26.09, 26.26A, or 26.26B RCW, or there is a valid foreign protection order as defined in RCW 26.52.020, or there is a Canadian domestic violence protection order as defined in RCW 26.55.010, and the respondent or person to be restrained knows of the order, a violation of any of the following provisions of the order is a gross misdemeanor, except as provided in subsections (4) and (5) of this section:

        i. The restraint provisions prohibiting acts or threats of violence against, or stalking of, a protected party, or the restraint provisions prohibiting contact with a protected party;

        ii. A provision excluding the person from a residence, workplace, school, or day care;

        iii. A provision prohibiting the person from knowingly coming within, or knowingly remaining within, a specified distance of a location, a protected party's person, or a protected party's vehicle;

        iv. A provision prohibiting interfering with the protected party's efforts to remove a pet owned, possessed, leased, kept, or held by the petitioner, the respondent, or a minor child residing with either the petitioner or the respondent; or

    v. A provision of a foreign protection order or a Canadian domestic violence protection order specifically indicating that a violation will be a crime.

    b. Upon conviction, and in addition to any other penalties provided by law, the court:

        i. May require that the respondent submit to electronic monitoring. The court shall specify who must provide the electronic monitoring services and the terms under which the monitoring must be performed. The order also may include a requirement that the respondent pay the costs of the monitoring. The court shall consider the ability of the convicted person to pay for electronic monitoring; and

        ii. Shall impose a fine of $15, in addition to any penalty or fine imposed, for a violation of a domestic violence protection order issued under this chapter. Revenue from the $15 fine must be remitted monthly to the state treasury for deposit in the domestic violence prevention account.

2. A law enforcement officer shall arrest without a warrant and take into custody a person whom the law enforcement officer has probable cause to believe has violated a domestic violence protection order, a sexual assault protection order, a stalking protection order, or a vulnerable adult protection order, or an order issued under chapter 9A.40, 9A.44, 9A.46, 9A.88, 9.94A, 10.77, 10.99, 26.09, 26.26A, or 26.26B RCW, or a valid foreign protection order as defined in RCW 26.52.020, or a Canadian domestic violence protection order as defined in RCW 26.55.010, that restrains the person or excludes the person from a residence, workplace, school, or day care, or prohibits the person from knowingly coming within, or knowingly remaining within, a specified distance of a location, a protected party's person, or a protected party's vehicle, if the person restrained knows of the order. Presence of the order in the law enforcement computer-based criminal intelligence information system is not the only means of establishing knowledge of the order.

3. A violation of a domestic violence protection order, a sexual assault protection order, a stalking protection order, or a vulnerable adult protection order, or an order issued under chapter 9A.40, 9A.44, 9A.46, 9A.88, 9.94A, 10.77, 10.99, 26.09, 26.26A, or 26.26B RCW, or a valid foreign protection order as defined in RCW 26.52.020, or a Canadian domestic violence protection order as defined in RCW 26.55.010, shall also constitute contempt of court, and is subject to the penalties prescribed by law.

4. Any assault that is a violation of a domestic violence protection order, a sexual assault protection order, a stalking protection order, or a vulnerable adult protection order, or an order issued under chapter 9A.40, 9A.44, 9A.46, 9A.88, 9.94A, 10.77, 10.99, 26.09, 26.26A, or 26.26B RCW, or a valid foreign protection order as defined in RCW 26.52.020, or a Canadian domestic violence protection order as defined in RCW 26.55.010, and that does not amount to assault in the first or second degree under RCW 9A.36.011 or 9A.36.021 is a class C felony, and any conduct in violation of such an order that is reckless and creates a substantial risk of death or serious physical injury to another person is a class C felony.

5. A violation of a domestic violence protection order, a sexual assault protection order, a stalking protection order, or a vulnerable adult protection order, or a court order issued under chapter 9A.40, 9A.44, 9A.46, 9A.88, 9.94A, 10.77, 10.99, 26.09, 26.26A, or 26.26B RCW, or a valid foreign protection order as defined in RCW 26.52.020, or a Canadian domestic violence protection order as defined in RCW 26.55.010, is a class C felony if the offender has at least two previous convictions for violating the provisions of a domestic violence protection order, a sexual assault protection order, a stalking protection order, or a vulnerable adult protection order, or an order issued under chapter 9A.40, 9A.44, 9A.46, 9A.88, 9.94A, 10.77, 10.99, 26.09, 26.26A, or 26.26B RCW, or a valid foreign protection order as defined in RCW 26.52.020, or a Canadian domestic violence protection order as defined in RCW 26.55.010. The previous convictions may involve the same victim or other victims specifically protected by the orders the offender violated.

6. [Empty]

    a. A defendant arrested for violating a domestic violence protection order, sexual assault protection order, stalking protection order, or vulnerable adult protection order, or an order granted under chapter 9A.40, 9A.44, 9A.46, 9A.88, 9.94A, 10.77, 10.99, 26.09, 26.26A, or 26.26B RCW, or a valid foreign protection order as defined in RCW 26.52.020, or a Canadian domestic violence protection order as defined in RCW 26.55.010, is required to appear in person before a magistrate within one judicial day after the arrest. At the time of the appearance, the court shall determine the necessity of imposing a no-contact order or other conditions of pretrial release.

    b. A defendant who is charged by citation, complaint, or information with violating any protection order identified in (a) of this subsection and not arrested shall appear in court for arraignment in person as soon as practicable, but in no event later than 14 days after the next day on which court is in session following the issuance of the citation or the filing of the complaint or information.

7. Upon the filing of an affidavit by the petitioner or any law enforcement officer alleging that the respondent has violated a domestic violence protection order, a sexual assault protection order, a stalking protection order, or a vulnerable adult protection order, or an order granted under chapter 9A.40, 9A.44, 9A.46, 9A.88, 9.94A, 10.77, 10.99, 26.09, 26.26A, or 26.26B RCW, or a valid foreign protection order as defined in RCW 26.52.020, or a Canadian domestic violence protection order as defined in RCW 26.55.010, the court may issue an order to the respondent, requiring the respondent to appear and show cause within 14 days as to why the respondent should not be found in contempt of court and punished accordingly. The hearing may be held in the court of any county or municipality in which the petitioner or respondent temporarily or permanently resides at the time of the alleged violation.

8. Appearances required under this section are mandatory and cannot be waived.

## Section 3
If the defendant has been found not guilty by reason of insanity and a substantial danger, or presents a substantial likelihood of committing criminal acts jeopardizing public safety or security, so as to require treatment then the secretary shall immediately cause the defendant to be evaluated to ascertain if the defendant has a developmental disability. When appropriate, and subject to available funds, the defendant may be committed to a program specifically reserved for the treatment and training of persons with developmental disabilities. A person so committed shall receive habilitation services according to an individualized service plan specifically developed to treat the behavior which was the subject of the criminal proceedings. The treatment program shall be administered by developmental disabilities professionals and others trained specifically in the needs of persons with developmental disabilities. The treatment program shall provide physical security to a degree consistent with the finding that the defendant is dangerous and may incorporate varying conditions of security and alternative sites when the dangerousness of any particular defendant makes this necessary. The department may limit admissions to this specialized program in order to ensure that expenditures for services do not exceed amounts appropriated by the legislature and allocated by the department for such services. The department may establish admission priorities in the event that the number of eligible persons exceeds the limits set by the department.
