# 76.44 - Institute of forest resources.
* [76.44.010 - Institute created.](#7644010---institute-created)
* [76.44.020 - Administration of institute.](#7644020---administration-of-institute)
* [76.44.030 - Duties.](#7644030---duties)
* [76.44.040 - Dissemination of research results.](#7644040---dissemination-of-research-results)
* [76.44.050 - Authority to solicit financial support—Use of funds for the institute's operations and activities.](#7644050---authority-to-solicit-financial-supportuse-of-funds-for-the-institutes-operations-and-activities)
* [76.44.070 - Addressing issues facing the forest sector.](#7644070---addressing-issues-facing-the-forest-sector)
* [76.44.080 - Policy advisory committee—Membership—Compensation.](#7644080---policy-advisory-committeemembershipcompensation)
* [76.44.090 - Director to coordinate cooperatives and centers.](#7644090---director-to-coordinate-cooperatives-and-centers)
## 76.44.010 - Institute created.
There is hereby created the institute of forest resources of the state of Washington which shall operate under the authority of the board of regents of the University of Washington.

\[ [1979 c 50 § 1](https://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1979c50.pdf?cite=1979%20c%2050%20§%201); [1947 c 177 § 1](https://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1947c177.pdf?cite=1947%20c%20177%20§%201); Rem. Supp. 1947 § 10831-1; \]

## 76.44.020 - Administration of institute.
The institute of forest resources shall be administered and directed by the director of the school of forest resources at the University of Washington.

\[ [2011 c 187 § 3](https://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/2011-12/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/House/1254-S.SL.pdf?cite=2011%20c%20187%20§%203); [1988 c 81 § 21](https://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1988c81.pdf?cite=1988%20c%2081%20§%2021); [1979 c 50 § 2](https://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1979c50.pdf?cite=1979%20c%2050%20§%202); [1959 c 306 § 1](https://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1959c306.pdf?cite=1959%20c%20306%20§%201); [1947 c 177 § 2](https://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1947c177.pdf?cite=1947%20c%20177%20§%202); Rem. Supp. 1947 § 10831-2; \]

## 76.44.030 - Duties.
1. The institute of forest resources shall pursue coordinated research and education related to the forest sector and its multiple components, including:

   a. Forest conservation, restoration, sustainable management, and utilization;

   b. The evaluation of the economic, ecological, and societal value of forestland in both the rural and urban environment;

   c. The manufacture and marketing of forest products, including timber products, nontimber products, environmental services, and the provision of recreation and aesthetic values.

2. The institute of forest resources must seek to provide a framework for identifying, prioritizing, funding, and conducting interdisciplinary research critical to the forest sector and the development of integrated, synthesized information and decision support tools that improve the understanding of complex forestry issues for stakeholders, policymakers, and other interested parties.

3. In pursuit of these objectives, the institute of forest resources is authorized to cooperate, when cooperation advances the objectives listed in this section, with other entities, including but not limited to:

   a. Universities;

   b. State and federal agencies;

   c. Conservation and environmental organizations;

   d. *Community and urban forestry organizations; and

   e. Domestic or foreign industrial and business institutions.

\[ [2011 c 187 § 4](https://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/2011-12/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/House/1254-S.SL.pdf?cite=2011%20c%20187%20§%204); [1979 c 50 § 5](https://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1979c50.pdf?cite=1979%20c%2050%20§%205); [1947 c 177 § 3](https://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1947c177.pdf?cite=1947%20c%20177%20§%203); Rem. Supp. 1947 § 10831-3; \]

## 76.44.040 - Dissemination of research results.
The results of any research undertaken by the institute or in which the institute participates shall be available to all industries and citizens of the state of Washington and the institute is authorized to disseminate such information.

\[ [1979 c 50 § 6](https://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1979c50.pdf?cite=1979%20c%2050%20§%206); [1947 c 177 § 4](https://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1947c177.pdf?cite=1947%20c%20177%20§%204); Rem. Supp. 1947 § 10831-4; \]

## 76.44.050 - Authority to solicit financial support—Use of funds for the institute's operations and activities.
1. The institute of forest resources may solicit gifts, grants, conveyances, bequests, and devices, including both real or personal property, in trust or otherwise, to be directed to the institute for carrying out the objectives of the institute as provided in this chapter.

2. The institute of forest resources may solicit contracts for work, financial and in-kind contributions, and support from private industries, interest groups, federal and state sources, and other sources deemed appropriate by the director of the institute.

3. The institute of forest resources may utilize separately appropriated funds of the University of Washington for the institute's operations and activities.

\[ [2011 c 187 § 5](https://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/2011-12/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/House/1254-S.SL.pdf?cite=2011%20c%20187%20§%205); [1979 c 50 § 7](https://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1979c50.pdf?cite=1979%20c%2050%20§%207); [1947 c 177 § 5](https://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1947c177.pdf?cite=1947%20c%20177%20§%205); Rem. Supp. 1947 § 10831-5; \]

## 76.44.070 - Addressing issues facing the forest sector.
The legislature finds that there are many issues facing the forest sector, such as climate change, forest health and fire, carbon accounting, habitat and diversity, timber and water supplies, economic competitiveness, and the economic health of forest dependent communities. Enhancing the capability to effectively address these forest issues is critical to the state of Washington. To meet this need, the University of Washington school of forest resources will continue to work with the various interests concerned with the state's forest resources, including the legislature, state and federal governments, environmental organizations, local communities, the timber industry, and tribes, to improve these entities' ability to competitively recruit, educate, and train a high quality workforce. In order to meet these goals, it is important to our state, and in particular the University of Washington, to continue to have strong undergraduate and graduate programs in forestry and natural resources to provide well-trained professionals to meet workforce needs.

\[ [2011 c 187 § 2](https://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/2011-12/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/House/1254-S.SL.pdf?cite=2011%20c%20187%20§%202); [2010 c 188 § 2](https://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/2009-10/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/House/2541-S.SL.pdf?cite=2010%20c%20188%20§%202); \]

## 76.44.080 - Policy advisory committee—Membership—Compensation.
1. The director of the school of forest resources at the University of Washington may, at the discretion of the director, appoint and maintain an eleven-member policy advisory committee to advise the director on policies for the institute of forest resources that are consistent with the institute's objectives as provided in this chapter.

2. If activated, the membership of the policy advisory committee must represent, to the extent possible, the various interests concerned with the institute of forest resources, including state and federal agencies, tribal governments, conservation and environmental organizations, urban forestry interests, rural communities, industry, and business.

3. Members of the advisory committee may not receive any salary or other compensation for service on the advisory committee. However, each member may be compensated, at the discretion of the director of the institute, for each day in actual attendance at or traveling to and from meetings of the advisory committee in accordance with RCW 43.03.220 together with travel expenses in accordance with RCW 43.03.050 and 43.03.060.

\[ [2011 c 187 § 6](https://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/2011-12/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/House/1254-S.SL.pdf?cite=2011%20c%20187%20§%206); \]

## 76.44.090 - Director to coordinate cooperatives and centers.
The director of the school of forest resources at the University of Washington shall coordinate the various cooperatives and centers within the school of forest resources to promote a holistic, efficient, and integrated approach that broadens the research and outreach programs and addresses issues facing the forest sector.

\[ [2011 c 187 § 7](https://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/2011-12/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/House/1254-S.SL.pdf?cite=2011%20c%20187%20§%207); \]

