# 1.50 - Washington gift of life award.
* [1.50.005 - Findings—Intent.](#150005---findingsintent)
* [1.50.006 - Findings—Intent.](#150006---findingsintent)
* [1.50.010 - Definitions.](#150010---definitions)
* [1.50.030 - Washington gift of life award—Presentation.](#150030---washington-gift-of-life-awardpresentation)
* [1.50.040 - Appearance of award—Inscription.](#150040---appearance-of-awardinscription)
## 1.50.005 - Findings—Intent.
The legislature finds that persons who donate organs help save the lives and promote the well-being of others in a manner that demonstrates the noblest side of human nature. Many families and friends of both the donors and the donees may want to remember the special act of donation in a way that honors the memory of the donor and encourages donation by others in the future.

To recognize the special kindness of those who donate their organs, the legislature establishes the Washington gift of life award.

\[ [1999 c 264 § 1](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/1999-00/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/Senate/5828-S.SL.pdf?cite=1999%20c%20264%20§%201); [1998 c 59 § 1](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/1997-98/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/Senate/6667-S.SL.pdf?cite=1998%20c%2059%20§%201); \]

## 1.50.006 - Findings—Intent.
1. The legislature finds that eighty-four people died waiting for an organ transplant in Washington state in 2013. The legislature further finds that more than two thousand six hundred people are currently waiting for a lifesaving organ transplant in Washington state. Forty of those patients waiting are under the age of eighteen and more than two hundred of those patients have been waiting for more than five years for their lifesaving gift. The legislature further finds that organ donation is a very rare and precious gift. Less than one percent of all people who die are eligible to donate their organs due to the unique circumstances needed at death to donate organs. Every donor is a critical donation to those waiting.

2. Therefore, the legislature intends to update the gift of life award to recognize all Washington citizens who have donated critical lifesaving organs.

\[ [2015 c 8 § 1](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/2015-16/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/Senate/5532.SL.pdf?cite=2015%20c%208%20§%201); \]

## 1.50.010 - Definitions.
Unless the context clearly requires otherwise, the definitions in this section apply throughout this chapter.

1. "Organ donor" means an individual who makes an anatomical gift of an organ under chapter 68.64 RCW.

2. "Organ procurement organization" has the same meaning as in RCW 68.64.010.

\[ [2015 c 8 § 2](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/2015-16/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/Senate/5532.SL.pdf?cite=2015%20c%208%20§%202); [2008 c 139 § 25](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/2007-08/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/House/1637-S.SL.pdf?cite=2008%20c%20139%20§%2025); [1998 c 59 § 2](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/1997-98/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/Senate/6667-S.SL.pdf?cite=1998%20c%2059%20§%202); \]

## 1.50.030 - Washington gift of life award—Presentation.
1. The governor's office shall annually present the Washington gift of life award to families of donors who have donated organs in accordance with chapter 68.64 RCW.

Organ procurement organizations may nominate the individuals eligible under this section to represent all those who have donated organs during the previous calendar year and may submit documentation supporting the eligibility of the individuals to the governor's office. If more than one organ procurement organization is involved, they shall coordinate in harmony to designate by consensus the organ procurement organization among them to have primary administrative responsibility under this chapter.

2. The governor's office shall present the awards on an annual basis to each eligible organ donor's family in coordination with the organ procurement organization. Only one award may be presented to the family of an organ donor.

3. Organ procurement organizations shall seek permission from the family of organ donors selected to receive the gift of life award to release the name of the organ donor to the governor's office for printing of a gift of life certificate and use at any gift of life ceremonies or events.

\[ [2015 c 8 § 3](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/2015-16/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/Senate/5532.SL.pdf?cite=2015%20c%208%20§%203); [1999 c 264 § 2](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/1999-00/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/Senate/5828-S.SL.pdf?cite=1999%20c%20264%20§%202); [1998 c 59 § 4](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/1997-98/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/Senate/6667-S.SL.pdf?cite=1998%20c%2059%20§%204); \]

## 1.50.040 - Appearance of award—Inscription.
The Washington gift of life award shall consist of the seal of the state of Washington and be inscribed with the words: "For the greatest act of kindness in donating organs to save the lives of others."

\[ [2015 c 8 § 4](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/2015-16/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/Senate/5532.SL.pdf?cite=2015%20c%208%20§%204); [1999 c 264 § 3](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/1999-00/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/Senate/5828-S.SL.pdf?cite=1999%20c%20264%20§%203); [1998 c 59 § 5](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/1997-98/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/Senate/6667-S.SL.pdf?cite=1998%20c%2059%20§%205); \]

