# 28A.155 - Special education.
* [28A.155.010 - Purpose.](#28a155010---purpose)
* [28A.155.020 - Administration of program in the office of the superintendent of public instruction—Adoption of definitions by rule—Local school district powers not limited.](#28a155020---administration-of-program-in-the-office-of-the-superintendent-of-public-instructionadoption-of-definitions-by-rulelocal-school-district-powers-not-limited)
* [28A.155.030 - Division administrative officer—Duties.](#28a155030---division-administrative-officerduties)
* [28A.155.040 - Authority of districts—Participation of department of social and health services.](#28a155040---authority-of-districtsparticipation-of-department-of-social-and-health-services)
* [28A.155.045 - Certificate of individual achievement. (Expires August 31, 2024.)](#28a155045---certificate-of-individual-achievement-expires-august-31-2024)
* [28A.155.050 - Services through special excess cost aid programs—Apportionment—Allocations from state excess funds.](#28a155050---services-through-special-excess-cost-aid-programsapportionmentallocations-from-state-excess-funds)
* [28A.155.060 - District authority to contract with approved agencies—Approval standards.](#28a155060---district-authority-to-contract-with-approved-agenciesapproval-standards)
* [28A.155.070 - Services to students of preschool age with disabilities—Apportionment—Allocations from state excess cost funds.](#28a155070---services-to-students-of-preschool-age-with-disabilitiesapportionmentallocations-from-state-excess-cost-funds)
* [28A.155.080 - Appeal from denial of educational program.](#28a155080---appeal-from-denial-of-educational-program)
* [28A.155.090 - Superintendent of public instruction's duty and authority.](#28a155090---superintendent-of-public-instructions-duty-and-authority)
* [28A.155.100 - Sanctions applied to noncomplying districts.](#28a155100---sanctions-applied-to-noncomplying-districts)
* [28A.155.105 - Braille instruction—Definitions.](#28a155105---braille-instructiondefinitions)
* [28A.155.115 - Braille instruction—Assessment—Provision in student's curriculum.](#28a155115---braille-instructionassessmentprovision-in-students-curriculum)
* [28A.155.140 - Curriculum-based assessment procedures for early intervening services.](#28a155140---curriculum-based-assessment-procedures-for-early-intervening-services)
* [28A.155.160 - Assistive devices and services—Interagency cooperative agreements—Definitions.](#28a155160---assistive-devices-and-servicesinteragency-cooperative-agreementsdefinitions)
* [28A.155.170 - Graduation ceremony.](#28a155170---graduation-ceremony)
* [28A.155.190 - Information on autism.](#28a155190---information-on-autism)
* [28A.155.200 - Condensed compliance reports—Second-class districts.](#28a155200---condensed-compliance-reportssecond-class-districts)
* [28A.155.210 - Use of restraint or isolation—Requirement for procedures to notify parent or guardian.](#28a155210---use-of-restraint-or-isolationrequirement-for-procedures-to-notify-parent-or-guardian)
* [28A.155.220 - High school transition services—Interagency agreements—Education data center to monitor certain outcomes—Annual report by superintendent of public instruction.](#28a155220---high-school-transition-servicesinteragency-agreementseducation-data-center-to-monitor-certain-outcomesannual-report-by-superintendent-of-public-instruction)
* [28A.155.230 - Student language.](#28a155230---student-language)
## 28A.155.010 - Purpose.
It is the purpose of RCW 28A.155.010 through 28A.155.160, 28A.160.030, and 28A.150.390 to ensure that all children with disabilities as defined in RCW 28A.155.020 shall have the opportunity for an appropriate education at public expense as guaranteed to them by the Constitution of this state and applicable federal laws.

\[ [2007 c 115 § 1](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/2007-08/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/Senate/5775.SL.pdf?cite=2007%20c%20115%20§%201); [1995 c 77 § 7](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/1995-96/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/Senate/5276.SL.pdf?cite=1995%20c%2077%20§%207); [1990 c 33 § 120](http://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1990c33.pdf?cite=1990%20c%2033%20§%20120); [1971 ex.s. c 66 § 1](http://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1971ex1c66.pdf?cite=1971%20ex.s.%20c%2066%20§%201); \]

## 28A.155.020 - Administration of program in the office of the superintendent of public instruction—Adoption of definitions by rule—Local school district powers not limited.
There is established in the office of the superintendent of public instruction an administrative section or unit for the education of children with disabilities who require special education.

Students with disabilities are those children whether enrolled in school or not who through an evaluation process are determined eligible for special education due to a disability.

In accordance with part B of the federal individuals with disabilities education improvement act and any other federal or state laws relating to the provision of special education services, the superintendent of public instruction shall require each school district in the state to insure an appropriate educational opportunity for all children with disabilities between the ages of three and twenty-one, but when the twenty-first birthday occurs during the school year, the educational program may be continued until the end of that school year. The superintendent of public instruction, by rule, shall establish for the purpose of excess cost funding, as provided in RCW 28A.150.390, 28A.160.030, and 28A.155.010 through 28A.155.160, functional definitions of special education, the various types of disabling conditions, and eligibility criteria for special education programs for children with disabilities, including referral procedures, use of positive behavior interventions, the education curriculum and statewide or district-wide assessments, parent and district requests for special education due process hearings, and procedural safeguards. For the purposes of RCW 28A.155.010 through 28A.155.160, an appropriate education is defined as an education directed to the unique needs, abilities, and limitations of the children with disabilities who are enrolled either full time or part time in a school district. School districts are strongly encouraged to provide parental training in the care and education of the children and to involve parents in the classroom.

Nothing in this section shall prohibit the establishment or continuation of existing cooperative programs between school districts or contracts with other agencies approved by the superintendent of public instruction, which can meet the obligations of school districts to provide education for children with disabilities, or prohibit the continuation of needed related services to school districts by the department of social and health services.

This section shall not be construed as in any way limiting the powers of local school districts set forth in RCW 28A.155.070.

\[ [2015 c 206 § 2](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/2015-16/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/House/1240-S.SL.pdf?cite=2015%20c%20206%20§%202); [2007 c 115 § 2](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/2007-08/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/Senate/5775.SL.pdf?cite=2007%20c%20115%20§%202); [1995 c 77 § 8](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/1995-96/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/Senate/5276.SL.pdf?cite=1995%20c%2077%20§%208); [1990 c 33 § 121](http://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1990c33.pdf?cite=1990%20c%2033%20§%20121); [1985 c 341 § 4](http://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1985c341.pdf?cite=1985%20c%20341%20§%204); [1984 c 160 § 1](http://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1984c160.pdf?cite=1984%20c%20160%20§%201); [1971 ex.s. c 66 § 2](http://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1971ex1c66.pdf?cite=1971%20ex.s.%20c%2066%20§%202); [1969 ex.s. c 2 § 2](http://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1969ex1c2.pdf?cite=1969%20ex.s.%20c%202%20§%202); [1969 ex.s. c 223 § 28A.13.010](http://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1969ex1c223.pdf?cite=1969%20ex.s.%20c%20223%20§%2028A.13.010); [1951 c 92 § 1](http://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1951c92.pdf?cite=1951%20c%2092%20§%201); prior:   1943 c 120 § 1; Rem. Supp. 1943 § 4679-25.  1943 c 120 § 2, part; Rem. Supp. 1943 § 4679-26, part; \]

## 28A.155.030 - Division administrative officer—Duties.
The superintendent of public instruction shall employ an administrative officer of the division. The administrative officer, under the direction of the superintendent of public instruction, shall coordinate and supervise the program of special education for eligible children with disabilities in the school districts of the state. He or she shall ensure that school districts provide an appropriate educational opportunity for all children with disabilities in need of special education and related services and shall coordinate with the state secretary of social and health services and with county and regional officers on cases where related services are available for children with disabilities.

\[ [2007 c 115 § 3](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/2007-08/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/Senate/5775.SL.pdf?cite=2007%20c%20115%20§%203); [1995 c 77 § 9](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/1995-96/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/Senate/5276.SL.pdf?cite=1995%20c%2077%20§%209); [1990 c 33 § 122](http://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1990c33.pdf?cite=1990%20c%2033%20§%20122); [1975 1st ex.s. c 275 § 52](http://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1975ex1c275.pdf?cite=1975%201st%20ex.s.%20c%20275%20§%2052); [1972 ex.s. c 10 § 1](http://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1972ex1c10.pdf?cite=1972%20ex.s.%20c%2010%20§%201); [1971 ex.s. c 66 § 3](http://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1971ex1c66.pdf?cite=1971%20ex.s.%20c%2066%20§%203); [1971 c 48 § 3](http://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1971c48.pdf?cite=1971%20c%2048%20§%203); [1969 ex.s. c 223 § 28A.13.020](http://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1969ex1c223.pdf?cite=1969%20ex.s.%20c%20223%20§%2028A.13.020); prior:  1943 c 120 § 3; Rem. Supp. 1943 § 4679-27; \]

## 28A.155.040 - Authority of districts—Participation of department of social and health services.
The board of directors of each school district, for the purpose of compliance with the provisions of RCW 28A.150.390, 28A.160.030, and 28A.155.010 through 28A.155.160 and chapter 28A.190 RCW, shall cooperate with the superintendent of public instruction and with the administrative officer and shall provide an appropriate educational opportunity to children with disabilities, as defined in RCW 28A.155.020, in regular or special school facilities within the district or shall contract for such services with other agencies as provided in RCW 28A.155.060 or shall participate in an interdistrict arrangement in accordance with RCW 28A.335.160 and 28A.225.220 and/or 28A.225.250 and 28A.225.260.

In carrying out their responsibilities under this chapter, school districts severally or jointly with the approval of the superintendent of public instruction are authorized to support and/or contract for residential schools and/or homes approved by the department of social and health services for aid and special attention to students with disabilities.

The cost of board and room in facilities approved by the department of social and health services shall be provided by the department of social and health services for those students with disabilities eligible for such aid under programs of the department. The cost of approved board and room shall be provided for those students with disabilities not eligible under programs of the department of social and health services but deemed in need of the same by the superintendent of public instruction: PROVIDED, That no school district shall be financially responsible for special education programs for students who are attending residential schools operated by the department of social and health services: PROVIDED FURTHER, That the provisions of RCW 28A.150.390, 28A.160.030, and 28A.155.010 through 28A.155.100 shall not preclude the extension by the superintendent of public instruction of special education opportunities to students with disabilities in residential schools operated by the department of social and health services.

\[ [2007 c 115 § 4](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/2007-08/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/Senate/5775.SL.pdf?cite=2007%20c%20115%20§%204); [1995 c 77 § 10](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/1995-96/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/Senate/5276.SL.pdf?cite=1995%20c%2077%20§%2010); [1990 c 33 § 123](http://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1990c33.pdf?cite=1990%20c%2033%20§%20123); [1971 ex.s. c 66 § 4](http://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1971ex1c66.pdf?cite=1971%20ex.s.%20c%2066%20§%204); [1969 ex.s. c 223 § 28A.13.030](http://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1969ex1c223.pdf?cite=1969%20ex.s.%20c%20223%20§%2028A.13.030); [1959 c 122 § 1](http://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1959c122.pdf?cite=1959%20c%20122%20§%201); [1953 c 135 § 1](http://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1953c135.pdf?cite=1953%20c%20135%20§%201); [1943 c 120 § 4](http://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1943c120.pdf?cite=1943%20c%20120%20§%204); Rem. Supp. 1943 § 4679-28; \]

## 28A.155.045 - Certificate of individual achievement. (Expires August 31, 2024.)
Beginning with the graduating class of 2008, and concluding with the graduating class of 2021, students served under this chapter, who are not appropriately served by the graduation pathway options established in RCW 28A.655.250, even with accommodations, may earn a certificate of individual achievement. The certificate may be earned using multiple measures to demonstrate skills and abilities commensurate with their individualized education programs. The determination of whether the graduation pathway options established in RCW 28A.655.250 or the multiple measures authorized in this section are appropriate shall be made by the student's individualized education program team. For the students who use the multiple measures authorized by this section, the certificate of individual achievement is required for graduation from a public high school. The multiple measures that may be used to demonstrate skills and abilities of students under this section must be in agreement with the appropriate educational opportunity provided for the student as required by this chapter. The superintendent of public instruction, in consultation with the state special education advisory council, shall develop the guidelines for determining which types of multiple measures to demonstrate skills and abilities under this section are appropriate to use and graduation pathways that might be added to those in RCW 28A.655.250 to support achievement of all students served under this chapter.

Nothing in this section shall be construed to deny a student the right to participation in the graduation pathway options established in RCW 28A.655.250.

This section expires August 31, 2024.

\[ [2019 c 252 § 104](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/2019-20/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/House/1599-S2.SL.pdf?cite=2019%20c%20252%20§%20104); [2007 c 354 § 3](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/2007-08/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/Senate/6023-S.SL.pdf?cite=2007%20c%20354%20§%203); [2004 c 19 § 104](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/2003-04/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/House/2195-S.SL.pdf?cite=2004%20c%2019%20§%20104); \]

## 28A.155.050 - Services through special excess cost aid programs—Apportionment—Allocations from state excess funds.
Any child who is eligible for special education services through special excess cost aid programs authorized under RCW 28A.155.010 through 28A.155.160 shall be given such services in the least restrictive environment as determined by the student's individualized education program (IEP) team in the school district in which such student resides. Any school district required to provide such services shall thereupon be granted regular apportionment of state and county school funds and, in addition, allocations from state excess funds made available for such special services for such period of time as such special education program is given: PROVIDED, That should such student or any other student with disabilities attend and participate in a special education program operated by another school district in accordance with the provisions of RCW 28A.225.210, 28A.225.220, and/or 28A.225.250, such regular apportionment shall be granted to the receiving school district, and such receiving school district shall be reimbursed by the district in which such student resides in accordance with rules adopted by the superintendent of public instruction for the entire approved excess cost not reimbursed from such regular apportionment.

\[ [2007 c 115 § 5](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/2007-08/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/Senate/5775.SL.pdf?cite=2007%20c%20115%20§%205); [1995 c 77 § 11](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/1995-96/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/Senate/5276.SL.pdf?cite=1995%20c%2077%20§%2011); [1990 c 33 § 124](http://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1990c33.pdf?cite=1990%20c%2033%20§%20124); [1971 ex.s. c 66 § 5](http://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1971ex1c66.pdf?cite=1971%20ex.s.%20c%2066%20§%205); [1969 ex.s. c 223 § 28A.13.040](http://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1969ex1c223.pdf?cite=1969%20ex.s.%20c%20223%20§%2028A.13.040); [1943 c 120 § 5](http://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1943c120.pdf?cite=1943%20c%20120%20§%205); Rem. Supp. 1943 § 4679-29; \]

## 28A.155.060 - District authority to contract with approved agencies—Approval standards.
For the purpose of carrying out the provisions of RCW 28A.155.020 through 28A.155.050, the board of directors of every school district shall be authorized to contract with agencies approved by the superintendent of public instruction for operating special education programs for students with disabilities. Approval standards for such agencies shall conform substantially with those of special education programs in the common schools.

\[ [2007 c 115 § 6](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/2007-08/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/Senate/5775.SL.pdf?cite=2007%20c%20115%20§%206); [2006 c 263 § 915](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/2005-06/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/House/3098-S2.SL.pdf?cite=2006%20c%20263%20§%20915); [1995 c 77 § 12](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/1995-96/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/Senate/5276.SL.pdf?cite=1995%20c%2077%20§%2012); [1990 c 33 § 125](http://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1990c33.pdf?cite=1990%20c%2033%20§%20125); [1971 ex.s. c 66 § 6](http://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1971ex1c66.pdf?cite=1971%20ex.s.%20c%2066%20§%206); \]

## 28A.155.070 - Services to students of preschool age with disabilities—Apportionment—Allocations from state excess cost funds.
Special educational programs provided by the state and the school districts thereof for students with disabilities shall be extended to include students of preschool age. School districts shall be entitled to the regular apportionments from state and county school funds, as provided by law, and in addition to allocations from state excess cost funds made available for such special services for those students with disabilities who are given such special services.

\[ [2007 c 115 § 9](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/2007-08/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/Senate/5775.SL.pdf?cite=2007%20c%20115%20§%209); 2007 c 115 § 8; [2006 c 269 § 3](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/2005-06/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/House/1107-S.SL.pdf?cite=2006%20c%20269%20§%203); [1995 c 77 § 13](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/1995-96/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/Senate/5276.SL.pdf?cite=1995%20c%2077%20§%2013); [1971 ex.s. c 66 § 7](http://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1971ex1c66.pdf?cite=1971%20ex.s.%20c%2066%20§%207); [1969 ex.s. c 223 § 28A.13.050](http://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1969ex1c223.pdf?cite=1969%20ex.s.%20c%20223%20§%2028A.13.050); [1951 c 92 § 2](http://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1951c92.pdf?cite=1951%20c%2092%20§%202); [1949 c 186 § 1](http://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1949c186.pdf?cite=1949%20c%20186%20§%201); Rem. Supp. 1949 § 4901-3; \]

## 28A.155.080 - Appeal from denial of educational program.
Where a child with disabilities as defined in RCW 28A.155.020 has been denied the opportunity of a special educational program by a local school district there shall be a right of appeal by the parent or guardian of such child to the superintendent of public instruction pursuant to procedures established by the superintendent and in accordance with RCW 28A.155.090 and part B of the federal individuals with disabilities education improvement act.

\[ [2007 c 115 § 10](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/2007-08/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/Senate/5775.SL.pdf?cite=2007%20c%20115%20§%2010); [1995 c 77 § 14](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/1995-96/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/Senate/5276.SL.pdf?cite=1995%20c%2077%20§%2014); [1990 c 33 § 126](http://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1990c33.pdf?cite=1990%20c%2033%20§%20126); [1971 ex.s. c 66 § 8](http://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1971ex1c66.pdf?cite=1971%20ex.s.%20c%2066%20§%208); \]

## 28A.155.090 - Superintendent of public instruction's duty and authority.
The superintendent of public instruction shall have the duty and authority, through the administrative section or unit for the education of children with disabling conditions, to:

1. Assist school districts in the formation of programs to meet the needs of children with disabilities;

2. Develop interdistrict cooperation programs for children with disabilities as authorized in RCW 28A.225.250;

3. Provide, upon request, to parents or guardians of children with disabilities, information as to the special education programs for students with disabilities offered within the state;

4. Assist, upon request, the parent or guardian of any child with disabilities in the placement of any child with disabilities who is eligible for but not receiving special educational services for children with disabilities;

5. Approve school district and agency programs as being eligible for special excess cost financial aid to students with disabilities;

6. Consistent with the provisions of RCW 28A.150.390, 28A.160.030, and 28A.155.010 through 28A.155.160, and part B of the federal individuals with disabilities education improvement act, administer administrative hearings and other procedures to ensure procedural safeguards of children with disabilities; and

7. Promulgate such rules as are necessary to implement part B of the federal individuals with disabilities education improvement act or other federal law providing for special education services for children with disabilities and the several provisions of RCW 28A.150.390, 28A.160.030, and 28A.155.010 through 28A.155.160 and to ensure appropriate access to and participation in the general education curriculum and participation in statewide assessments for all students with disabilities.

\[ [2007 c 115 § 11](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/2007-08/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/Senate/5775.SL.pdf?cite=2007%20c%20115%20§%2011); [1995 c 77 § 15](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/1995-96/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/Senate/5276.SL.pdf?cite=1995%20c%2077%20§%2015); [1990 c 33 § 127](http://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1990c33.pdf?cite=1990%20c%2033%20§%20127); [1985 c 341 § 5](http://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1985c341.pdf?cite=1985%20c%20341%20§%205); [1971 ex.s. c 66 § 9](http://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1971ex1c66.pdf?cite=1971%20ex.s.%20c%2066%20§%209); \]

## 28A.155.100 - Sanctions applied to noncomplying districts.
The superintendent of public instruction is hereby authorized and directed to establish appropriate sanctions to be applied to any school district of the state failing to comply with the provisions of RCW 28A.150.390, 28A.160.030, and 28A.155.010 through 28A.155.060 and 28A.155.080 through 28A.155.160 to be applied beginning upon the effective date thereof, which sanctions shall include withholding of any portion of state aid to such district until such time as compliance is assured.

\[ [2007 c 115 § 12](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/2007-08/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/Senate/5775.SL.pdf?cite=2007%20c%20115%20§%2012); [1990 c 33 § 128](http://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1990c33.pdf?cite=1990%20c%2033%20§%20128); [1971 ex.s. c 66 § 12](http://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1971ex1c66.pdf?cite=1971%20ex.s.%20c%2066%20§%2012); \]

## 28A.155.105 - Braille instruction—Definitions.
Unless the context clearly requires otherwise, the definitions in this section apply in RCW 28A.155.115.

1. "Student" means a student who:

    a.  Has a visual acuity of 20/200 or less in the better eye with conventional correction or having a limited field of vision such that the widest diameter of the visual field subtends an angular distance not greater than twenty degrees;

    b.  Is unable to read printed material at a competitive rate with facility due to functional visual impairment or lack of visual acuity; or

    c.  Has a physical condition with a medical prognosis of a significant visual deterioration to the extent that (a) or (b) of this subsection could apply.

2. "Braille" means the system of reading and writing through touch commonly known as standard English Braille.

\[ [1996 c 135 § 2](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/1995-96/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/House/1078-S2.SL.pdf?cite=1996%20c%20135%20§%202); \]

## 28A.155.115 - Braille instruction—Assessment—Provision in student's curriculum.
1. Each student shall be assessed individually to determine the appropriate learning media for the student including but not limited to Braille.

2. No student may be denied the opportunity for instruction in Braille reading and writing solely because the student has some remaining vision.

3. This section does not require the exclusive use of Braille if there are other special education services to meet the student's educational needs. The provision of special education or other services does not preclude Braille use or instruction.

4. If a student's individualized learning media assessment indicates that Braille is an appropriate learning medium, instruction in Braille shall be provided as a part of such student's educational curriculum and if such student has an individualized education program, such instruction shall be provided as part of that program.

5. If Braille will not be provided to a student, the reason for not incorporating it in the student's individualized education program shall be documented in writing and provided to the parent or guardian. If no individualized education program exists, such documentation, signed by the parent or guardian, shall be placed in the student's file.

\[ [2007 c 115 § 13](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/2007-08/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/Senate/5775.SL.pdf?cite=2007%20c%20115%20§%2013); [1996 c 135 § 3](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/1995-96/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/House/1078-S2.SL.pdf?cite=1996%20c%20135%20§%203); \]

## 28A.155.140 - Curriculum-based assessment procedures for early intervening services.
School districts may use curriculum-based assessment procedures as measures for developing academic early intervening services, as defined under part B of the federal individuals with disabilities education improvement act, and curriculum planning: PROVIDED, That the use of curriculum-based assessment procedures shall not deny a student the right to use of other assessments to determine eligibility or participation in special education programs as provided by RCW 28A.155.010 through 28A.155.160.

\[ [2007 c 115 § 14](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/2007-08/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/Senate/5775.SL.pdf?cite=2007%20c%20115%20§%2014); [1991 c 116 § 4](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/1991-92/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/House/1264.SL.pdf?cite=1991%20c%20116%20§%204); [1990 c 33 § 131](http://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1990c33.pdf?cite=1990%20c%2033%20§%20131); [1987 c 398 § 1](http://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1987c398.pdf?cite=1987%20c%20398%20§%201); \]

## 28A.155.160 - Assistive devices and services—Interagency cooperative agreements—Definitions.
Notwithstanding any other provision of law, the office of the superintendent of public instruction, the department of children, youth, and families, the Washington center for deaf and hard of hearing youth, the Washington state school for the blind, school districts, educational service districts, and all other state and local government educational agencies and the department of services for the blind, the department of social and health services, and all other state and local government agencies concerned with the care, education, or habilitation or rehabilitation of children with disabilities may enter into interagency cooperative agreements for the purpose of providing assistive technology devices and services to children with disabilities. Such arrangements may include but are not limited to interagency agreements for the acquisition, including joint funding, maintenance, loan, sale, lease, or transfer of assistive technology devices and for the provision of assistive technology services including but not limited to assistive technology assessments and training.

For the purposes of this section, "assistive device" means any item, piece of equipment, or product system, whether acquired commercially off-the-shelf, modified, or customized, that is used to increase, maintain, or improve functional capabilities of children with disabilities. The term "assistive technology service" means any service that directly assists a child with a disability in the selection, acquisition, or use of an assistive technology device. Assistive technology service includes:

1. The evaluation of the needs of a child with a disability, including a functional evaluation of the child in the child's customary environment;

2. Purchasing, leasing, or otherwise providing for the acquisition of assistive technology devices by children with disabilities;

3. Selecting, designing, fitting, customizing, adapting, applying, retaining, repairing, or replacing of assistive technology devices;

4. Coordinating and using other therapies, interventions, or services with assistive technology devices, such as those associated with existing education and rehabilitation plans and programs;

5. Training or technical assistance for a child with a disability or if appropriate, the child's family; and

6. Training or technical assistance for professionals, including individuals providing education and rehabilitation services, employers, or other individuals who provide services to, employ, or are otherwise substantially involved in the major life functions of children with disabilities.

\[ [2019 c 266 § 14](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/2019-20/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/House/1604.SL.pdf?cite=2019%20c%20266%20§%2014); [2018 c 58 § 32](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/2017-18/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/Senate/6287.SL.pdf?cite=2018%20c%2058%20§%2032); [2009 c 381 § 24](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/2009-10/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/House/1879-S2.SL.pdf?cite=2009%20c%20381%20§%2024); [2007 c 115 § 15](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/2007-08/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/Senate/5775.SL.pdf?cite=2007%20c%20115%20§%2015); [1997 c 104 § 3](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/1997-98/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/House/1573.SL.pdf?cite=1997%20c%20104%20§%203); \]

## 28A.155.170 - Graduation ceremony.
1. Beginning July 1, 2007, each school district that operates a high school shall establish a policy and procedures that permit any student who is receiving special education or related services under an individualized education program pursuant to state and federal law and who will continue to receive such services between the ages of eighteen and twenty-one to participate in the graduation ceremony and activities after four years of high school attendance with his or her age-appropriate peers and receive a certificate of attendance.

2. Participation in a graduation ceremony and receipt of a certificate of attendance under this section does not preclude a student from continuing to receive special education and related services under an individualized education program beyond the graduation ceremony.

3. A student's participation in a graduation ceremony and receipt of a certificate of attendance under this section shall not be construed as the student's receipt of a high school diploma pursuant to RCW 28A.230.120.

\[ [2019 c 252 § 106](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/2019-20/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/House/1599-S2.SL.pdf?cite=2019%20c%20252%20§%20106); [2007 c 318 § 2](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/2007-08/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/House/1050-S.SL.pdf?cite=2007%20c%20318%20§%202); \]

## 28A.155.190 - Information on autism.
1. To the extent funds are appropriated for this purpose, by September 1, 2008, the office of the superintendent of public instruction, in collaboration with the department of health, the department of social and health services, educational service districts, local school districts, the autism center at the University of Washington, and the autism society of Washington, shall distribute information on child find responsibilities under Part B and Part C of the federal individuals with disabilities education act, as amended, to agencies, districts, and schools that participate in the location, evaluation, and identification of children who may be eligible for early intervention services or special education services.

2. To the extent funds are made available, by September 1, 2008, the office of the superintendent of public instruction, in collaboration with the department of health and the department of social and health services, shall develop posters to be distributed to medical offices and clinics, grocery stores, and other public places with information on autism and how parents can gain access to the diagnosis and identification of autism and contact information for services and support. These must be made available on the internet for ease of distribution.

\[ [2008 c 220 § 2](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/2007-08/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/Senate/6743-S.SL.pdf?cite=2008%20c%20220%20§%202); \]

## 28A.155.200 - Condensed compliance reports—Second-class districts.
Any compliance reporting requirements as a result of laws in this chapter that apply to second-class districts may be submitted in accordance with RCW 28A.330.250.

\[ [2011 c 45 § 4](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/2011-12/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/Senate/5184-S.SL.pdf?cite=2011%20c%2045%20§%204); \]

## 28A.155.210 - Use of restraint or isolation—Requirement for procedures to notify parent or guardian.
A school that is required to develop an individualized education program as required by federal law must include within the plan procedures for notification of a parent or guardian regarding the use of restraint or isolation.

\[ [2013 c 202 § 3](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/2013-14/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/House/1688-S.SL.pdf?cite=2013%20c%20202%20§%203); \]

## **28A.155.220 - High school transition services—Interagency agreements—Education data center to monitor certain outcomes—Annual report by superintendent of public instruction.**
1. The office of the superintendent of public instruction must establish interagency agreements with the department of social and health services, the department of services for the blind, and any other state agency that provides high school transition services for special education students. Such interagency agreements shall not interfere with existing individualized education programs, nor override any individualized education program team's decision-making power. The purpose of the interagency agreements is to foster effective collaboration among the multiple agencies providing transition services for individualized education program-eligible special education students from the beginning of transition planning, as soon as educationally and developmentally appropriate, through age twenty-one, or through high school graduation, whichever occurs first. Interagency agreements are also intended to streamline services and programs, promote efficiencies, and establish a uniform focus on improved outcomes related to self-sufficiency.

2. [Empty]

    a. When educationally and developmentally appropriate, the interagency responsibilities and linkages with transition services under subsection (1) of this section must be addressed in a transition plan to a postsecondary setting in the individualized education program of a student with disabilities.

    b. Transition planning shall be based upon educationally and developmentally appropriate transition assessments that outline the student's individual needs, strengths, preferences, and interests. Transition assessments may include observations, interviews, inventories, situational assessments, formal and informal assessments, as well as academic assessments.

    c. The transition services that the transition plan must address include activities needed to assist the student in reaching postsecondary goals and courses of study to support postsecondary goals.

    d. Transition activities that the transition plan may address include instruction, related services, community experience, employment and other adult living objectives, daily living skills, and functional vocational evaluation.

    e. When educationally and developmentally appropriate, a discussion must take place with the student and parents, and others as needed, to determine the postsecondary goals or postschool vision for the student. This discussion may be included as part of an annual individualized education program review, high school and beyond plan meeting, or any other meeting that includes parents, students, and educators. The postsecondary goals included in the transition plan shall be goals that are measurable and must be based on appropriate transition assessments related to training, education, employment, and independent living skills, when necessary. The goals must also be based on the student's needs, while considering the strengths, preferences, and interests of the student.

    f. As the student gets older, changes in the transition plan may be noted in the annual update of the student's individualized education program.

    g. A  transition plan required under this subsection (2) **must be aligned with a student's high school and beyond plan**.

3. To the extent that data is available through data-sharing agreements established by the education data center under RCW 43.41.400, the education data center must monitor the following outcomes for individualized education program-eligible special education students after high school graduation:

    a. The number of students who, within one year of high school graduation:

        i. Enter integrated employment paid at the greater of minimum wage or competitive wage for the type of employment, with access to related employment and health benefits; or

        ii. Enter a postsecondary education or training program focused on leading to integrated employment;

    b. The wages and number of hours worked per pay period;

    c. The impact of employment on any state and federal benefits for individuals with disabilities;

    d. Indicators of the types of settings in which students who previously received transition services primarily reside;

    e. Indicators of improved economic status and self-sufficiency;

    f. Data on those students for whom a postsecondary or integrated employment outcome does not occur within one year of high school graduation, including:

        i. Information on the reasons that the desired outcome has not occurred;

        ii. The number of months the student has not achieved the desired outcome; and

        iii. The efforts made to ensure the student achieves the desired outcome.

4. To the extent that the data elements in subsection (3) of this section are available to the education data center through data-sharing agreements, the office of the superintendent of public instruction must prepare an annual report using existing resources and submit the report to the legislature.

5. **To minimize gaps in services through the transition process, no later than three years before students receiving special education services leave the school system, the office of the superintendent of public instruction shall transmit a list of potentially eligible students to the department of social and health services, the counties, the department of services for the blind, and any other state agency working with individuals with intellectual and developmental disabilities. The office of the superintendent of public instruction shall ensure that consent be obtained prior to the release of this information as required in accordance with state and federal requirements.**

## 28A.155.230 - Student language.
1. Beginning in the 2019-20 school year, school districts must document the language in which families of special education students prefer to communicate and whether a qualified interpreter for the student's family was provided at any planning meeting related to a student's individualized education program or plan developed under section 504 of the rehabilitation act of 1973 and meetings related to school discipline and truancy.

2. For the purposes of this section, "qualified interpreter" means someone who is able to interpret effectively, accurately, and impartially, both receptively and expressively using any necessary specialized vocabulary.

\[ [2019 c 256 § 3](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/2019-20/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/House/1130-S.SL.pdf?cite=2019%20c%20256%20§%203); \]

