# 11.92 - Guardianship—Powers and duties of guardian or limited guardian.
* [11.92.010 - Guardians or limited guardians under court control—Legal age. (Effective until January 1, 2022.)](#1192010---guardians-or-limited-guardians-under-court-controllegal-age-effective-until-january-1-2022)
* [11.92.035 - Claims. (Effective until January 1, 2022.)](#1192035---claims-effective-until-january-1-2022)
* [11.92.040 - Duties of guardian or limited guardian in general. (Effective until January 1, 2022.)](#1192040---duties-of-guardian-or-limited-guardian-in-general-effective-until-january-1-2022)
* [11.92.043 - Additional duties. (Effective until January 1, 2022.)](#1192043---additional-duties-effective-until-january-1-2022)
* [11.92.050 - Intermediate accounts or reports—Hearing—Order. (Effective until January 1, 2022.)](#1192050---intermediate-accounts-or-reportshearingorder-effective-until-january-1-2022)
* [11.92.053 - Settlement of estate upon termination. (Effective until January 1, 2022.)](#1192053---settlement-of-estate-upon-termination-effective-until-january-1-2022)
* [11.92.056 - Citation of surety on bond. (Effective until January 1, 2022.)](#1192056---citation-of-surety-on-bond-effective-until-january-1-2022)
* [11.92.060 - Guardian to represent incapacitated person—Compromise of claims—Service of process. (Effective until January 1, 2022.)](#1192060---guardian-to-represent-incapacitated-personcompromise-of-claimsservice-of-process-effective-until-january-1-2022)
* [11.92.090 - Sale, exchange, lease, or mortgage of property. (Effective until January 1, 2022.)](#1192090---sale-exchange-lease-or-mortgage-of-property-effective-until-january-1-2022)
* [11.92.096 - Guardian access to certain held assets. (Effective until January 1, 2022.)](#1192096---guardian-access-to-certain-held-assets-effective-until-january-1-2022)
* [11.92.100 - Petition—Contents. (Effective until January 1, 2022.)](#1192100---petitioncontents-effective-until-january-1-2022)
* [11.92.110 - Sale of real estate. (Effective until January 1, 2022.)](#1192110---sale-of-real-estate-effective-until-january-1-2022)
* [11.92.115 - Return and confirmation of sale. (Effective until January 1, 2022.)](#1192115---return-and-confirmation-of-sale-effective-until-january-1-2022)
* [11.92.120 - Confirmation conclusive. (Effective until January 1, 2022.)](#1192120---confirmation-conclusive-effective-until-january-1-2022)
* [11.92.125 - Broker's fee and closing expenses—Sale, exchange, mortgage, or lease of real estate. (Effective until January 1, 2022.)](#1192125---brokers-fee-and-closing-expensessale-exchange-mortgage-or-lease-of-real-estate-effective-until-january-1-2022)
* [11.92.130 - Performance of contracts. (Effective until January 1, 2022.)](#1192130---performance-of-contracts-effective-until-january-1-2022)
* [11.92.140 - Court authorization for actions regarding guardianship funds. (Effective until January 1, 2022.)](#1192140---court-authorization-for-actions-regarding-guardianship-funds-effective-until-january-1-2022)
* [11.92.150 - Request for special notice of proceedings. (Effective until January 1, 2022.)](#1192150---request-for-special-notice-of-proceedings-effective-until-january-1-2022)
* [11.92.160 - Citation for failure to file account or report. (Effective until January 1, 2022.)](#1192160---citation-for-failure-to-file-account-or-report-effective-until-january-1-2022)
* [11.92.170 - Removal of property of nonresident incapacitated person. (Effective until January 1, 2022.)](#1192170---removal-of-property-of-nonresident-incapacitated-person-effective-until-january-1-2022)
* [11.92.180 - Compensation and expenses of guardian or limited guardian—Attorney's fees—Department of social and health services clients paying part of costs—Rules. (Effective until January 1, 2022.)](#1192180---compensation-and-expenses-of-guardian-or-limited-guardianattorneys-feesdepartment-of-social-and-health-services-clients-paying-part-of-costsrules-effective-until-january-1-2022)
* [11.92.185 - Concealed or embezzled property. (Effective until January 1, 2022.)](#1192185---concealed-or-embezzled-property-effective-until-january-1-2022)
* [11.92.190 - Detention of person in residential placement facility against will prohibited—Effect of court order—Service of notice of residential placement. (Effective until January 1, 2022.)](#1192190---detention-of-person-in-residential-placement-facility-against-will-prohibitedeffect-of-court-orderservice-of-notice-of-residential-placement-effective-until-january-1-2022)
* [11.92.195 - Incapacitated persons—Right to associate with persons of their choosing. (Effective until January 1, 2022.)](#1192195---incapacitated-personsright-to-associate-with-persons-of-their-choosing-effective-until-january-1-2022)
## 11.92.010 - Guardians or limited guardians under court control—Legal age. (Effective until January 1, 2022.)
Guardians or limited guardians herein provided for shall at all times be under the general direction and control of the court making the appointment. For the purposes of chapters 11.88 and 11.92 RCW, all persons shall be of full and legal age when they shall be eighteen years old.

\[ [1975 1st ex.s. c 95 § 18](http://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1975ex1c95.pdf?cite=1975%201st%20ex.s.%20c%2095%20§%2018); [1971 c 28 § 5](http://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1971c28.pdf?cite=1971%20c%2028%20§%205); [1965 c 145 § 11.92.010](http://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1965c145.pdf?cite=1965%20c%20145%20§%2011.92.010); [1923 c 72 § 1](http://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1923c72.pdf?cite=1923%20c%2072%20§%201); [1917 c 156 § 202](http://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1917c156.pdf?cite=1917%20c%20156%20§%20202); RRS § 1572; \]

## 11.92.035 - Claims. (Effective until January 1, 2022.)
1. DUTY OF GUARDIAN TO PAY. A guardian of the estate is under a duty to pay from the estate all just claims against the estate of the incapacitated person, whether they constitute liabilities of the incapacitated person which arose prior to the guardianship or liabilities properly incurred by the guardian for the benefit of the incapacitated person or his or her estate and whether arising in contract or in tort or otherwise, upon allowance of the claim by the court or upon approval of the court in a settlement of the guardian's accounts. The duty of the guardian to pay from the estate shall not preclude the guardian's personal liability for his or her own contracts and acts made and performed on behalf of the estate as it exists according to the common law. If it appears that the estate is likely to be exhausted before all existing claims are paid, preference shall be given to (a) the expenses of administration including guardian's fees, attorneys' fees, and court costs; (b) prior claims for the care, maintenance and education of the incapacitated person and of the person's dependents over other claims. Subject to court orders limiting such powers, a limited guardian of an estate shall have the same authority to pay claims.

2. CLAIMS MAY BE PRESENTED. Any person having a claim against the estate of an incapacitated person, or against the guardian of his or her estate as such, may file a written claim with the court for determination at any time before it is barred by the statute of limitations. After ten days' notice to a guardian or limited guardian, a hearing on the claim shall be held, at which upon proof thereof and after consideration of any defenses or objections by the guardian, the court may enter an order for its allowance and payment from the estate. Any action against the guardian of the estate as such shall be deemed a claim duly filed.

\[ [1990 c 122 § 19](http://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1990c122.pdf?cite=1990%20c%20122%20§%2019); [1975 1st ex.s. c 95 § 19](http://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1975ex1c95.pdf?cite=1975%201st%20ex.s.%20c%2095%20§%2019); [1965 c 145 § 11.92.035](http://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1965c145.pdf?cite=1965%20c%20145%20§%2011.92.035); \]

## 11.92.040 - Duties of guardian or limited guardian in general. (Effective until January 1, 2022.)
It shall be the duty of the guardian or limited guardian of an estate:

1. To file within three months after the guardian's appointment a verified inventory of all the property of the incapacitated person which comes into the guardian's possession or knowledge, including a statement of all encumbrances, liens, and other secured charges on any item;

2. To file annually, within ninety days after the anniversary date of the guardian's or limited guardian's appointment, and also within ninety days after termination of the appointment, unless the court for good cause orders a different deadline to file following termination, a written verified account of the administration for court approval, which account shall contain at least the following information:

    a.  Identification of property of the guardianship estate as of the date of the last account or, in the case of the initial account, as of the date of inventory;

    b.  Identification of all additional property received into the guardianship, including income by source;

    c.  Identification of all expenditures made during the account period by major categories;

    d.  Any adjustments to the guardianship estate required to establish its present fair market value, including gains or losses on sale or other disposition and any mortgages, deeds of trust or other encumbrances against the guardianship estate; and

    e.  Identification of all property held in the guardianship estate as of the date of account, the assessed value of any real property and the guardian's estimate of the present fair market values of other property (including the basis on which such estimate is made), and the total net fair market value of the guardianship estate. In addition, immediately following such statement of present fair market value, the account shall set forth a statement of current amount of the guardian's bond and any other court-ordered protection for the security of the guardianship assets;

3. The court in its discretion may allow reports at intervals of up to thirty-six months for estates with assets (exclusive of real property) having a value of not more than twice the homestead exemption. Notwithstanding contrary provisions of this section, the guardian or limited guardian of an estate need not file an annual report with the court if the funds of the guardianship are held for the benefit of a minor in a blocked account unless the guardian requests a withdrawal from such account, in which case the guardian shall provide a written verified account of the administration of the guardianship estate along with the guardian's petition for the withdrawal. The guardian or limited guardian shall report any substantial change in income or assets of the guardianship estate within thirty days of the occurrence of the change. A hearing shall be scheduled for court review and determination of provision for increased bond or other provision in accordance with RCW 11.88.100;

4. All court orders approving accounts or reports filed by a guardian or limited guardian must contain a guardianship summary placed directly below the case caption or on a separate cover page in the following form, or a substantially similar form, containing the following information:

GUARDIANSHIP SUMMARY

Date Guardian Appointed:. . . .Due Date for Report and Accounting:. . . .Date of Next Review:. . . .Letters Expire On:. . . .Bond Amount:$. . . .Restricted Account: Agreements Required:. . . .

Date Guardian Appointed:

. . . .

Due Date for Report and Accounting:



. . . .

Date of Next Review:

. . . .

Letters Expire On:

. . . .

Bond Amount:

$. . . .

Restricted Account: Agreements Required:



. . . .

Incapacitated Person (IP)Guardian of: [ ] Estate [ ] PersonName:Name:Address:Address:Phone:Phone:Facsimile:Facsimile:

Incapacitated Person (IP)

Guardian of: [ ] Estate [ ] Person

Name:

Name:

Address:

Address:

Phone:

Phone:

Facsimile:

Facsimile:

Standby GuardianAddressRelation to IP   

Standby Guardian

Address

Relation to IP

 

 

 

Interested PartiesAddressRelation to IP               

Interested Parties

Address

Relation to IP

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

5. To protect and preserve the guardianship estate, to apply it as provided in this chapter, to account for it faithfully, to perform all of the duties required by law, and at the termination of the guardianship or limited guardianship, to deliver the assets of the incapacitated person to the persons entitled thereto. Except as provided to the contrary herein, the court may authorize a guardian or limited guardian to do anything that a trustee can do under the provisions of RCW 11.98.070 for a period not exceeding one year from the date of the order or for a period corresponding to the interval in which the guardian's or limited guardian's report is required to be filed by the court pursuant to subsection (2) of this section, whichever period is longer;

6. To invest and reinvest the property of the incapacitated person in accordance with the rules applicable to investment of trust estates by trustees as provided in chapter 11.100 RCW, except that:

    a.  No investments shall be made without prior order of the court in any property other than unconditional interest bearing obligations of this state or of the United States and in obligations the interest and principal of which are unconditionally guaranteed by the United States, and in share accounts or deposits which are insured by an agency of the United States government. Such prior order of the court may authorize specific investments, or, in the discretion of the court, may authorize the guardian or limited guardian to invest and reinvest as provided in chapter 11.100 RCW without further order of the court;

    b.  If it is for the best interests of the incapacitated person that a specific property be used by the incapacitated person rather than sold and the proceeds invested, the court may so order;

7. To apply to the court no later than the filing of the inventory for an order authorizing disbursements on behalf of the incapacitated person. However, the guardian or limited guardian of the estate, or the person, department, bureau, agency, or charitable organization having the care and custody of an incapacitated person, may apply to the court for an order directing the guardian or limited guardian of the estate to pay to the person, department, bureau, agency, or charitable organization having the care and custody of an incapacitated person, or if the guardian or limited guardian of the estate has the care and custody of the incapacitated person, directing the guardian or limited guardian of the estate to apply an amount weekly, monthly, quarterly, semi-annually, or annually, as the court may direct, to be expended in the care, maintenance, and education of the incapacitated person and of his or her dependents. In proper cases, the court may order payment of amounts directly to the incapacitated person for his or her maintenance or incidental expenses. The amounts authorized under this section may be decreased or increased from time to time by direction of the court. If payments are made to another under an order of the court, the guardian or limited guardian of the estate is not bound to see to the application thereof;

8. To provide evidence of the guardian or limited guardian's successful completion of any standardized training video or web cast for guardians or limited guardians made available by the administrative office of the courts and the superior court when the guardian or limited guardian: (a) Was appointed prior to July 22, 2011; (b) is not a certified professional guardian or financial institution authorized under RCW 11.88.020; and (c) has not previously completed the requirements of RCW 11.88.020(3). The training video or web cast must be provided at no cost to the guardian or limited guardian. The superior court may, upon (i) petition by the guardian or limited guardian; or (ii) any other method as provided by local court rule: (A) For good cause, waive this requirement for guardians appointed prior to July 22, 2011. Good cause shall require evidence that the guardian already possesses the requisite knowledge to serve as a guardian without completing the training. When determining whether there is good cause to waive the training requirement, the court shall consider, among other facts, the length of time the guardian has been serving the incapacitated person; whether the guardian has timely filed all required reports with the court; whether the guardian is monitored by other state or local agencies; and whether there have been any allegations of abuse, neglect, or a breach of fiduciary duty against the guardian; or (B) extend the time period for completion of the training requirement for ninety days; and

9. To provide evidence of the guardian or limited guardian's successful completion of any additional or updated training video or web cast offered by the administrative office of the courts and the superior court as is required at the discretion of the superior court unless the guardian or limited guardian is a certified professional guardian or financial institution authorized under RCW 11.88.020. The training video or web cast must be provided at no cost to the guardian or limited guardian.

\[ [2011 c 329 § 9](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/2011-12/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/House/1053-S.SL.pdf?cite=2011%20c%20329%20§%209); [1991 c 289 § 10](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/1991-92/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/House/1510-S.SL.pdf?cite=1991%20c%20289%20§%2010); [1990 c 122 § 20](http://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1990c122.pdf?cite=1990%20c%20122%20§%2020); [1985 c 30 § 9](http://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1985c30.pdf?cite=1985%20c%2030%20§%209); [1984 c 149 § 12](http://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1984c149.pdf?cite=1984%20c%20149%20§%2012); [1979 c 32 § 2](http://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1979c32.pdf?cite=1979%20c%2032%20§%202); [1977 ex.s. c 309 § 13](http://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1977ex1c309.pdf?cite=1977%20ex.s.%20c%20309%20§%2013); [1975 1st ex.s. c 95 § 20](http://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1975ex1c95.pdf?cite=1975%201st%20ex.s.%20c%2095%20§%2020); [1965 c 145 § 11.92.040](http://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1965c145.pdf?cite=1965%20c%20145%20§%2011.92.040); prior:  1957 c 64 § 1; [1955 c 205 § 15](http://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1955c205.pdf?cite=1955%20c%20205%20§%2015); [1941 c 83 § 1](http://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1941c83.pdf?cite=1941%20c%2083%20§%201); [1917 c 156 § 205](http://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1917c156.pdf?cite=1917%20c%20156%20§%20205); Rem. Supp. 1941 § 1575; prior:  1895 c 42 § 1; Code 1881 § 1614; \]

## 11.92.043 - Additional duties. (Effective until January 1, 2022.)
1. It is the duty of the guardian or limited guardian of the person:

    a.  To file within three months after appointment a personal care plan for the incapacitated person, which must include (i) an assessment of the incapacitated person's physical, mental, and emotional needs and of such person's ability to perform or assist in activities of daily living, and (ii) the guardian's specific plan for meeting the identified and emerging personal care needs of the incapacitated person.

    b.  To file annually or, where a guardian of the estate has been appointed, at the time an account is required to be filed under RCW 11.92.040, a report on the status of the incapacitated person, which shall include:

        i.  The address and name of the incapacitated person and all residential changes during the period;

        ii.  The services or programs that the incapacitated person receives;

        iii.  The medical status of the incapacitated person;

        iv.  The mental status of the incapacitated person, including reports from mental health professionals on the status of the incapacitated person, if any exist;

        v.  Changes in the functional abilities of the incapacitated person;

        vi.  Activities of the guardian for the period;

        vii.  Any recommended changes in the scope of the authority of the guardian;

        viii.  The identity of any professionals who have assisted the incapacitated person during the period;

        ix.  [Empty]

            A.  Evidence of the guardian or limited guardian's successful completion of any standardized training video or web cast for guardians or limited guardians made available by the administrative office of the courts and the superior court when the guardian or limited guardian: (I) Was appointed prior to July 22, 2011; (II) is not a certified professional guardian or financial institution authorized under RCW 11.88.020; and (III) has not previously completed the requirements of RCW 11.88.020(3). The training video or web cast must be provided at no cost to the guardian or limited guardian.

            B.  The superior court may, upon petition by the guardian or limited guardian or any other method as provided by local court rule:

                I.  For good cause, waive this requirement for guardians appointed prior to July 22, 2011. Good cause requires evidence that the guardian already possesses the requisite knowledge to serve as a guardian without completing the training. When determining whether there is good cause to waive the training requirement, the court must consider, among other facts, the length of time the guardian has been serving the incapacitated person; whether the guardian has timely filed all required reports with the court; whether the guardian is monitored by other state or local agencies; and whether there have been any allegations of abuse, neglect, or a breach of fiduciary duty against the guardian; or

                II.  Extend the time period for completion of the training requirement for ninety days; and

        x.  Evidence of the guardian or limited guardian's successful completion of any additional or updated training video or web cast offered by the administrative office of the courts and the superior court as is required at the discretion of the superior court unless the guardian or limited guardian is a certified professional guardian or financial institution authorized under RCW 11.88.020. The training video or web cast must be provided at no cost to the guardian or limited guardian.

    c.  To report to the court within thirty days any substantial change in the incapacitated person's condition, or any changes in residence of the incapacitated person.

    d.  To inform any person entitled to special notice of proceedings under RCW 11.92.150 and any other person designated by the incapacitated person as soon as possible, but in no case more than five business days, after the incapacitated person:

        i.  Makes a change in residence that is intended or likely to last more than fourteen calendar days;

        ii.  Has been admitted to a medical facility for acute care in response to a life-threatening injury or medical condition that requires inpatient care;

        iii.  Has been treated in an emergency room setting or kept for hospital observation for more than twenty-four hours; or

        iv.  Dies, in which case the notification must be made in person, by telephone, or by certified mail.

    e.  Consistent with the powers granted by the court, to care for and maintain the incapacitated person in the setting least restrictive to the incapacitated person's freedom and appropriate to the incapacitated person's personal care needs, assert the incapacitated person's rights and best interests, and if the incapacitated person is a minor or where otherwise appropriate, to see that the incapacitated person receives appropriate training and education and that the incapacitated person has the opportunity to learn a trade, occupation, or profession.

    f.  Consistent with RCW 7.70.065, to provide timely, informed consent for health care of the incapacitated person, except in the case of a limited guardian where such power is not expressly provided for in the order of appointment or subsequent modifying order as provided in RCW 11.88.125 as now or hereafter amended, the standby guardian or standby limited guardian may provide timely, informed consent to necessary medical procedures if the guardian or limited guardian cannot be located within four hours after the need for such consent arises. No guardian, limited guardian, or standby guardian may involuntarily commit for mental health treatment, observation, or evaluation an alleged incapacitated person who is unable or unwilling to give informed consent to such commitment unless the procedures for involuntary commitment set forth in chapter 71.05 or 72.23 RCW are followed. Nothing in this section may be construed to allow a guardian, limited guardian, or standby guardian to consent to:

        i.  Therapy or other procedure which induces convulsion;

        ii.  Surgery solely for the purpose of psychosurgery;

        iii.  Other psychiatric or mental health procedures that restrict physical freedom of movement, or the rights set forth in RCW 71.05.217.

2. A guardian, limited guardian, or standby guardian who believes these procedures are necessary for the proper care and maintenance of the incapacitated person shall petition the court for an order unless the court has previously approved the procedure within the past thirty days. The court may order the procedure only after an attorney is appointed in accordance with RCW 11.88.045 if no attorney has previously appeared, notice is given, and a hearing is held in accordance with RCW 11.88.040.

\[ [2017 c 268 § 3](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/2017-18/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/House/1402-S2.SL.pdf?cite=2017%20c%20268%20§%203); [2011 c 329 § 3](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/2011-12/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/House/1053-S.SL.pdf?cite=2011%20c%20329%20§%203); [1991 c 289 § 11](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/1991-92/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/House/1510-S.SL.pdf?cite=1991%20c%20289%20§%2011); [1990 c 122 § 21](http://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1990c122.pdf?cite=1990%20c%20122%20§%2021); \]

## 11.92.050 - Intermediate accounts or reports—Hearing—Order. (Effective until January 1, 2022.)
1. Upon the filing of any intermediate guardianship or limited guardianship account or report required by statute, or of any intermediate account or report required by court rule or order, the court shall enter an order settling the guardianship account or report with regard to any receipts, expenditures, and investments made and acts done by the guardian or limited guardian to the date of the interim report.

2. Upon such account or report being filed, the court may, in its discretion, set a date for the hearing and require the service of the guardian's report or account and a notice of the hearing as provided in RCW 11.88.040 as now or hereafter amended or as specified by the court; and, in the event a hearing is ordered, the court may also appoint a guardian ad litem, whose duty it shall be to investigate the account or report of the guardian or limited guardian of the estate and to advise the court thereon at the hearing, in writing.

3. At the hearing on or upon the court's review of the account or report of the guardian or limited guardian, if the court is satisfied that the actions of the guardian or limited guardian have been proper, and that the guardian or limited guardian has in all respects discharged his or her trust with relation to the receipts, expenditures, investments, and acts, then, in such event, the court shall enter an order approving such account or report.

4. If a guardian or limited guardian fails to file the account or report or fails to appear at the hearing, the court shall enter an order for one or more of the following actions:

    a.  Entering an order to show cause and requiring the guardian to appear at a show cause hearing. At the hearing the court may take action to protect the incapacitated person, including, but not limited to, removing the guardian or limited guardian pursuant to RCW 11.88.120 and appointing a successor;

    b.  Directing the clerk to extend the letters, for good cause shown, for no more than ninety days, to permit the guardian to file his or her account or report;

    c.  Requiring the completion of any approved guardianship training made available to the guardian by the court;

    d.  Appointing a guardian ad litem subject to the requirements in RCW 11.88.090;

    e.  Providing other and further relief the court deems just and equitable.

5. If the court has appointed a guardian ad litem, the order shall be final and binding upon the incapacitated person, subject only to the right of appeal as upon a final order; provided that at the time of final account of said guardian or limited guardian or within one year after the incapacitated person attains his or her majority any such interim account may be challenged by the incapacitated person on the ground of fraud.

6. The procedure established in this section for financial accounts by guardians or limited guardians of the estate shall apply to personal care reports filed by guardians or limited guardians of the person under RCW 11.92.043.

\[ [2011 c 329 § 10](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/2011-12/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/House/1053-S.SL.pdf?cite=2011%20c%20329%20§%2010); [1995 c 297 § 6](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/1995-96/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/House/1865-S.SL.pdf?cite=1995%20c%20297%20§%206); [1990 c 122 s 23](http://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1990c122.pdf?cite=1990%20c%20122%20s%2023); [1975 1st ex.s. c 95 s 21](http://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1975ex1c95.pdf?cite=1975%201st%20ex.s.%20c%2095%20s%2021); [1965 c 145 s 11.92.050](http://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1965c145.pdf?cite=1965%20c%20145%20s%2011.92.050); [1943 c 29 s 1](http://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1943c29.pdf?cite=1943%20c%2029%20s%201); Rem. Supp. 1943 s 1575-1; \]

## 11.92.053 - Settlement of estate upon termination. (Effective until January 1, 2022.)
Within ninety days, unless the court orders a different deadline for good cause, after the termination of a guardianship for any reason, the guardian or limited guardian of the estate shall petition the court for an order settling his or her account as filed in accordance with RCW 11.92.040(2) with regard to any receipts, expenditures, and investments made and acts done by the guardian to the date of the termination. Upon the filing of the petition, the court shall set a date for the hearing of the petition after notice has been given in accordance with RCW 11.88.040. Any person interested may file objections to the petition or may appear at the time and place fixed for the hearing thereof and present his or her objections thereto. The court may take such testimony as it deems proper or necessary to determine whether an order settling the account should be issued and the transactions of the guardian be approved, and the court may appoint a guardian ad litem to review the report.

At the hearing on the petition of the guardian or limited guardian, if the court is satisfied that the actions of the guardian or limited guardian have been proper, and that the guardian has in all respects discharged his or her trust with relation to the receipts, expenditures, investments, and acts, then, in such event, the court shall enter an order approving the account, and the order shall be final and binding upon the incapacitated person, subject only to the right of appeal as upon a final order. However, within one year after the incompetent attains his or her majority any such account may be challenged by the incapacitated person on the ground of fraud.

\[ [2011 c 329 § 8](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/2011-12/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/House/1053-S.SL.pdf?cite=2011%20c%20329%20§%208); [1995 c 297 § 7](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/1995-96/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/House/1865-S.SL.pdf?cite=1995%20c%20297%20§%207); [1990 c 122 § 24](http://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1990c122.pdf?cite=1990%20c%20122%20§%2024); [1965 c 145 § 11.92.053](http://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1965c145.pdf?cite=1965%20c%20145%20§%2011.92.053); \]

## 11.92.056 - Citation of surety on bond. (Effective until January 1, 2022.)
If, at any hearing upon a petition to settle the account of any guardian or limited guardian, it shall appear to the court that said guardian or limited guardian has not fully accounted or that said account should not be settled, the court may continue said hearing to a day certain and may cite the surety or sureties upon the bond of said guardian or limited guardian to appear upon the date fixed in said citation and show cause why the account should not be disapproved and judgment entered for any deficiency against said guardian or limited guardian and the surety or sureties upon his or her bond. Said citation shall be personally served upon said surety or sureties in the manner provided by law for the service of summons in civil actions and shall be served not less than twenty days previous to said hearing. At said hearing any interested party, including the surety so cited, shall have the right to introduce any evidence which shall be material to the matter before the court. If, at said hearing, the final account of said guardian or limited guardian shall not be approved and the court shall find that said guardian or limited guardian is indebted to the incapacitated person in any amount, said court may thereupon enter final judgment against said guardian or limited guardian and the surety or sureties upon his or her bond, which judgment shall be enforceable in the same manner and to the same extent as judgments in ordinary civil actions.

\[ [1990 c 122 § 25](http://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1990c122.pdf?cite=1990%20c%20122%20§%2025); [1975 1st ex.s. c 95 § 22](http://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1975ex1c95.pdf?cite=1975%201st%20ex.s.%20c%2095%20§%2022); [1965 c 145 § 11.92.056](http://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1965c145.pdf?cite=1965%20c%20145%20§%2011.92.056); \]

## 11.92.060 - Guardian to represent incapacitated person—Compromise of claims—Service of process. (Effective until January 1, 2022.)
1. GUARDIAN MAY SUE AND BE SUED. When there is a guardian of the estate, all actions between the incapacitated person or the guardian and third persons in which it is sought to charge or benefit the estate of the incapacitated person shall be prosecuted by or against the guardian of the estate as such. The guardian shall represent the interests of the incapacitated person in the action and all process shall be served on him or her. A guardian or limited guardian of the estate shall report to the court any action commenced against the incapacitated person and shall secure court approval prior to initiating any legal action in the name of the incapacitated person.

2. JOINDER, AMENDMENT AND SUBSTITUTION. When the guardian of the estate is under personal liability for his or her own contracts and acts made and performed on behalf of the estate the guardian may be sued both as guardian and in his or her personal capacity in the same action. Misnomer or the bringing of the action by or against the incapacitated person shall not be grounds for dismissal of the action and leave to amend or substitute shall be freely granted. If an action was commenced by or against the incapacitated person before the appointment of a guardian of his or her estate, such guardian when appointed may be substituted as a party for the incapacitated person. If the appointment of the guardian of the estate is terminated, his or her successor may be substituted; if the incapacitated person dies, his or her personal representative may be substituted; if the incapacitated person is no longer incapacitated the person may be substituted.

3. GARNISHMENT, ATTACHMENT AND EXECUTION. When there is a guardian of the estate, the property and rights of action of the incapacitated person shall not be subject to garnishment or attachment, except for the foreclosure of a mortgage or other lien, and execution shall not issue to obtain satisfaction of any judgment against the incapacitated person or the guardian of the person's estate as such.

4. COMPROMISE BY GUARDIAN. Whenever it is proposed to compromise or settle any claim by or against the incapacitated person or the guardian as such, whether arising as a result of personal injury or otherwise, and whether arising before or after appointment of a guardian, the court on petition of the guardian of the estate, if satisfied that such compromise or settlement will be for the best interests of the incapacitated person, may enter an order authorizing the settlement or compromise be made.

5. LIMITED GUARDIAN. Limited guardians may serve and be served with process or actions on behalf of the incapacitated person, but only to the extent provided for in the court order appointing a limited guardian.

\[ [1990 c 122 § 26](http://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1990c122.pdf?cite=1990%20c%20122%20§%2026); [1975 1st ex.s. c 95 § 23](http://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1975ex1c95.pdf?cite=1975%201st%20ex.s.%20c%2095%20§%2023); [1965 c 145 § 11.92.060](http://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1965c145.pdf?cite=1965%20c%20145%20§%2011.92.060); [1917 c 156 § 206](http://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1917c156.pdf?cite=1917%20c%20156%20§%20206); RRS § 1576; prior:  1903 c 100 § 1; Code 1881 § 1611; [1860 p 226 § 328](http://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/Pages/session_laws.aspx?cite=1860%20p%20226%20§%20328); \]

## 11.92.090 - Sale, exchange, lease, or mortgage of property. (Effective until January 1, 2022.)
Whenever it shall appear to the satisfaction of a court by the petition of any guardian or limited guardian, that it is necessary or proper to sell, exchange, lease, mortgage, or grant an easement, license or similar interest in any of the real or personal property of the estate of the incapacitated person for the purpose of paying debts or for the care, support and education of the incapacitated person, or to redeem any property of the incapacitated person's estate covered by mortgage or other lien, or for the purpose of making any investments, or for any other purpose which to the court may seem right and proper, the court may make an order directing such sale, exchange, lease, mortgage, or grant of easement, license or similar interest of such part or parts of the real or personal property as shall to the court seem proper.

\[ [1990 c 122 § 27](http://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1990c122.pdf?cite=1990%20c%20122%20§%2027); [1975 1st ex.s. c 95 § 24](http://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1975ex1c95.pdf?cite=1975%201st%20ex.s.%20c%2095%20§%2024); [1965 c 145 § 11.92.090](http://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1965c145.pdf?cite=1965%20c%20145%20§%2011.92.090); [1917 c 156 § 212](http://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1917c156.pdf?cite=1917%20c%20156%20§%20212); RRS § 1582; prior: Code 1881 § 1620; [1855 p 17 § 14](http://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/Pages/session_laws.aspx?cite=1855%20p%2017%20§%2014); \]

## 11.92.096 - Guardian access to certain held assets. (Effective until January 1, 2022.)
1. All financial institutions as defined in *RCW 30.22.040(12), all insurance companies holding a certificate of authority under chapter 48.05 RCW, or any agent who constitutes a salesperson or broker-dealer of securities under the definitions of RCW 21.20.005 (hereafter individually and collectively referenced as "institution") shall provide the guardian access and control over the asset(s) described in (a)(vii) of this subsection, including but not limited to delivery of the asset to the guardian, upon receipt of the following:

    a.  An affidavit containing as an attachment a true and correct copy of the guardian's letters of guardianship and stating:

        i.  That as of the date of the affidavit, the affiant is a duly appointed guardian with authority over assets held by the institution but owned or subject to withdrawal or delivery to a client or depositor of the institution;

        ii.  The cause number of the guardianship;

        iii.  The name of the incapacitated person and the name of the client or depositor (which names shall be the same);

        iv.  The account or the safety deposit box number or numbers;

        v.  The address of the client or depositor;

        vi.  The name and address of the affiant-guardian being provided assets or access to assets;

        vii.  A description of and the value of the asset or assets, or, where the value cannot be readily ascertained, a reasonable estimate thereof, and a statement that the guardian receives delivery or control of each asset solely in its capacity as guardian;

        viii.  The date the guardian assumed control over the assets; and

        ix.  That a true and correct copy of the letters of guardianship duly issued by a court to the guardian is attached to the affidavit; and

    b.  An envelope, with postage prepaid, addressed to the clerk of the court issuing the letters of guardianship.

The affidavit shall be sent in the envelope by the institution to the clerk of the court together with a statement signed by an agent of the institution that the description of the asset set forth in the affidavit appears to be accurate, and confirming in the case of cash assets, the value of the asset.

2. Any guardian provided with access to a safe deposit box pursuant to subsection (1) of this section shall make an inventory of the contents of the box and attach this inventory to the affidavit before the affidavit is sent to the clerk of the court and before the contents of the box are released to the guardian. Any inventory shall be prepared in the presence of an employee of the institution and the statement of the institution required under subsection (1) of this section shall include a statement executed by the employee that the inventory appears to be accurate. The institution may require payment by the guardian of any fees or charges then due in connection with the asset or account and of a reasonable fee for witnessing preparation of the inventory and preparing the statement required by this subsection or subsection (1) of this section.

3. Any institution to which an affidavit complying with subsection (1) of this section is submitted may rely on the affidavit without inquiry and shall not be subject to any liability of any nature whatsoever to any person whatsoever, including but not limited to the institution's client or depositor or any other person with an ownership or other interest in or right to the asset, for the reliance or for providing the guardian access and control over the asset, including but not limited to delivery of the asset to the guardian.

\[ [1991 c 289 § 13](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/1991-92/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/House/1510-S.SL.pdf?cite=1991%20c%20289%20§%2013); \]

## 11.92.100 - Petition—Contents. (Effective until January 1, 2022.)
Such application shall be by petition, verified by the oath of the guardian or limited guardian, and shall substantially set forth:

1. The value and character of all personal estate belonging to the incapacitated person that has come to the knowledge or possession of such guardian or limited guardian.

2. The disposition of such personal estate.

3. The amount and condition of the incapacitated person's personal estate, if any, dependent upon the settlement of any estate, or the execution of any trust.

4. The annual income of the real estate of the incapacitated person.

5. The amount of rent received and the application thereof.

6. The proposed manner of reinvesting the proceeds of the sale, if asked for that purpose.

7. Each item of indebtedness, or the amount and character of the lien, if the sale is requested for the liquidation thereof.

8. The age of the incapacitated person, where and with whom residing.

9. All other facts connected with the estate and condition of the incapacitated person necessary to enable the court to fully understand the same. If there is no personal estate belonging to the incapacitated person in possession or expectancy, and none has come into the hands of such guardian or limited guardian, and no rents have been received, the fact shall be stated in the application.

\[ [1990 c 122 § 28](http://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1990c122.pdf?cite=1990%20c%20122%20§%2028); [1975 1st ex.s. c 95 § 25](http://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1975ex1c95.pdf?cite=1975%201st%20ex.s.%20c%2095%20§%2025); [1965 c 145 § 11.92.100](http://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1965c145.pdf?cite=1965%20c%20145%20§%2011.92.100); [1917 c 156 § 213](http://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1917c156.pdf?cite=1917%20c%20156%20§%20213); RRS § 1583; prior: Code 1881 § 1621; [1860 p 228 § 338](http://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/Pages/session_laws.aspx?cite=1860%20p%20228%20§%20338); [1855 p 17 § 15](http://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/Pages/session_laws.aspx?cite=1855%20p%2017%20§%2015); \]

## 11.92.110 - Sale of real estate. (Effective until January 1, 2022.)
The order directing the sale of any of the real property of the estate of the incapacitated person shall specify the particular property affected and the method, whether by public or private sale or by negotiation, and terms thereof, and with regard to the procedure and notices to be employed in conducting such sale, the provisions of RCW 11.56.060, 11.56.070, 11.56.080, and 11.56.110 shall be followed unless the court otherwise directs.

\[ [1990 c 122 § 29](http://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1990c122.pdf?cite=1990%20c%20122%20§%2029); [1975 1st ex.s. c 95 § 26](http://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1975ex1c95.pdf?cite=1975%201st%20ex.s.%20c%2095%20§%2026); [1965 c 145 § 11.92.110](http://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1965c145.pdf?cite=1965%20c%20145%20§%2011.92.110); [1917 c 156 § 214](http://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1917c156.pdf?cite=1917%20c%20156%20§%20214); RRS § 1524; prior: Code 1881 § 1623; [1860 p 229 § 340](http://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/Pages/session_laws.aspx?cite=1860%20p%20229%20§%20340); \]

## 11.92.115 - Return and confirmation of sale. (Effective until January 1, 2022.)
The guardian or limited guardian making any sale of real estate, either at public or private sale or sale by negotiation, shall within ten days after making such sale file with the clerk of the court his or her return of such sale, the same being duly verified. At any time after the expiration of ten days from the filing of such return, the court may, without notice, approve and confirm such sale and direct proper instruments of transfer to be executed and delivered. Upon the confirmation of any such sale, the court shall direct the guardian or limited guardian to make, execute and deliver instruments conveying the title to the person to whom such property may be sold and such instruments of conveyance shall be deemed to convey all the estate, rights and interest of the incapacitated person and of the person's estate. In the case of a sale by negotiation the guardians or limited guardians shall publish a notice in one issue of a legal newspaper published in the county in which the estate is being administered; the substance of such notice shall include the legal description of the property sold, the selling price and the date after which the sale may be confirmed: PROVIDED, That such confirmation date shall be at least ten days after such notice is published.

\[ [2010 c 8 § 2090](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/2009-10/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/Senate/6239-S.SL.pdf?cite=2010%20c%208%20§%202090); [1990 c 122 § 30](http://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1990c122.pdf?cite=1990%20c%20122%20§%2030); [1975 1st ex.s. c 95 § 27](http://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1975ex1c95.pdf?cite=1975%201st%20ex.s.%20c%2095%20§%2027); [1965 c 145 § 11.92.115](http://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1965c145.pdf?cite=1965%20c%20145%20§%2011.92.115); \]

## 11.92.120 - Confirmation conclusive. (Effective until January 1, 2022.)
No sale by any guardian or limited guardian of real or personal property shall be void or be set aside or be attacked because of any irregularities whatsoever, and none of the steps leading up to such sale or the confirmation thereof shall be jurisdictional, and the confirmation by the court of any such sale shall be conclusive as to the regularity and legality of such sale or sales, and the passing of title after confirmation by the court shall vest an absolute title in the purchaser, and such instrument of transfer may not be attacked for any purpose or any reason, except for fraud.

\[ [1975 1st ex.s. c 95 § 28](http://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1975ex1c95.pdf?cite=1975%201st%20ex.s.%20c%2095%20§%2028); [1965 c 145 § 11.92.120](http://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1965c145.pdf?cite=1965%20c%20145%20§%2011.92.120); [1917 c 156 § 215](http://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1917c156.pdf?cite=1917%20c%20156%20§%20215); RRS § 1585; prior: Code 1881 § 1625; [1860 p 229 § 343](http://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/Pages/session_laws.aspx?cite=1860%20p%20229%20§%20343); \]

## 11.92.125 - Broker's fee and closing expenses—Sale, exchange, mortgage, or lease of real estate. (Effective until January 1, 2022.)
In connection with the sale, exchange, mortgage, lease, or grant of easement or license in any property, the court may authorize the guardian or limited guardian to pay, out of the proceeds realized therefrom or out of the estate, the customary and reasonable auctioneer's and broker's fees and any necessary expenses for abstracting title insurance, survey, revenue stamps, and other necessary costs and expenses in connection therewith.

\[ [1977 ex.s. c 309 § 15](http://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1977ex1c309.pdf?cite=1977%20ex.s.%20c%20309%20§%2015); [1965 c 145 § 11.92.125](http://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1965c145.pdf?cite=1965%20c%20145%20§%2011.92.125); \]

## 11.92.130 - Performance of contracts. (Effective until January 1, 2022.)
If any person who is bound by contract in writing to perform shall become incapacitated before making the performance, the court having jurisdiction of the guardianship or limited guardianship of such property may, upon application of the guardian or limited guardian of the incapacitated person, or upon application of the person claiming to be entitled to the performance, make an order authorizing and directing the guardian or limited guardian to perform such contract. The application and the proceedings, shall, as nearly as may be, be the same as provided in chapter 11.60 RCW.

\[ [1990 c 122 § 31](http://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1990c122.pdf?cite=1990%20c%20122%20§%2031); [1975 1st ex.s. c 95 § 29](http://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1975ex1c95.pdf?cite=1975%201st%20ex.s.%20c%2095%20§%2029); [1965 c 145 § 11.92.130](http://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1965c145.pdf?cite=1965%20c%20145%20§%2011.92.130); [1923 c 142 § 5](http://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1923c142.pdf?cite=1923%20c%20142%20§%205); RRS § 1585a; \]

## 11.92.140 - Court authorization for actions regarding guardianship funds. (Effective until January 1, 2022.)
The court, upon the petition of a guardian of the estate of an incapacitated person other than the guardian of a minor, and after such notice as the court directs and other notice to all persons interested as required by chapter 11.96A RCW, may authorize the guardian to take any action, or to apply funds not required for the incapacitated person's own maintenance and support, in any fashion the court approves as being in keeping with the incapacitated person's wishes so far as they can be ascertained and as designed to minimize insofar as possible current or prospective state or federal income and estate taxes, permit entitlement under otherwise available federal or state medical or other assistance programs, and to provide for gifts to such charities, relatives, and friends as would be likely recipients of donations from the incapacitated person.

The action or application of funds may include but shall not be limited to the making of gifts, to the conveyance or release of the incapacitated person's contingent and expectant interests in property including marital or domestic partnership property rights and any right of survivorship incident to joint tenancy or tenancy by the entirety, to the exercise or release of the incapacitated person's powers as donee of a power of appointment, the making of contracts, the creation of revocable or irrevocable trusts of property of the incapacitated person's estate which may extend beyond the incapacitated person's disability or life, the establishment of custodianships for the benefit of a minor under chapter 11.114 RCW, the Washington uniform transfers to minors act, the exercise of options of the incapacitated person to purchase securities or other property, the exercise of the incapacitated person's right to elect options and to change beneficiaries under insurance and annuity policies and the surrendering of policies for their cash value, the exercise of the incapacitated person's right to any elective share in the estate of the incapacitated person's deceased spouse or deceased domestic partner, and the renunciation or disclaimer of any interest acquired by testate or intestate succession or by inter vivos transfer.

The guardian in the petition shall briefly outline the action or application of funds for which approval is sought, the results expected to be accomplished thereby and the savings expected to accrue. The proposed action or application of funds may include gifts of the incapacitated person's personal or real property. Gifts may be for the benefit of prospective legatees, devisees, or heirs apparent of the incapacitated person, or may be made to individuals or charities in which the incapacitated person is believed to have an interest. Gifts may or may not, in the discretion of the court, be treated as advancements to donees who would otherwise inherit property from the incapacitated person under the incapacitated person's will or under the laws of descent and distribution. The guardian shall also indicate in the petition that any planned disposition is consistent with the intentions of the incapacitated person insofar as the intentions can be ascertained, and if the incapacitated person's intentions cannot be ascertained, the incapacitated person will be presumed to favor reduction in the incidence of the various forms of taxation and the partial distribution of the incapacitated person's estate as provided in this section. The guardian shall not, however, be required to include as a beneficiary any person whom there is reason to believe would be excluded by the incapacitated person. No guardian may be required to file a petition as provided in this section, and a failure or refusal to so petition the court does not constitute a breach of the guardian's fiduciary duties.

\[ [2008 c 6 § 807](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/2007-08/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/House/3104-S2.SL.pdf?cite=2008%20c%206%20§%20807); [1999 c 42 § 616](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/1999-00/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/Senate/5196.SL.pdf?cite=1999%20c%2042%20§%20616); [1991 c 193 § 32](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/1991-92/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/House/1088-S.SL.pdf?cite=1991%20c%20193%20§%2032); [1990 c 122 § 32](http://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1990c122.pdf?cite=1990%20c%20122%20§%2032); [1985 c 30 § 10](http://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1985c30.pdf?cite=1985%20c%2030%20§%2010); [1984 c 149 § 13](http://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1984c149.pdf?cite=1984%20c%20149%20§%2013); \]

## 11.92.150 - Request for special notice of proceedings. (Effective until January 1, 2022.)
At any time after the issuance of letters of guardianship in the estate of any person and/or incapacitated person, any person interested in the estate, or in the incapacitated person, or any relative of the incapacitated person, or any authorized representative of any agency, bureau, or department of the United States government from or through which any compensation, insurance, pension or other benefit is being paid, or is payable, may serve upon the guardian or limited guardian, or upon the attorney for the guardian or limited guardian, and file with the clerk of the court where the guardianship or limited guardianship of the person and/or estate is pending, a written request stating the specific actions of which the applicant requests advance notice. Where the notice does not specify matters for which notice is requested, the guardian or limited guardian shall provide copies of all documents filed with the court and advance notice of his or her application for court approval of any action in the guardianship.

The request for special written notice shall designate the name, address and post office address of the person upon whom the notice is to be served and no service shall be required under this section and RCW 11.92.160 as now or hereafter amended other than in accordance with the designation unless and until a new designation has been made.

When any account, report, petition, or proceeding is filed in the estate of which special written notice is requested, the court shall fix a time for hearing which shall allow at least ten days for service of the notice before the hearing; and notice of the hearing shall be served upon the person designated in the written request at least ten days before the date fixed for the hearing. The service may be made by leaving a copy with the person designated, or that person's authorized representative, or by mailing through the United States mail, with postage prepaid to the person and place designated.

\[ [1990 c 122 § 33](http://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1990c122.pdf?cite=1990%20c%20122%20§%2033); [1985 c 30 § 11](http://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1985c30.pdf?cite=1985%20c%2030%20§%2011); [1984 c 149 § 14](http://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1984c149.pdf?cite=1984%20c%20149%20§%2014); [1975 1st ex.s. c 95 § 30](http://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1975ex1c95.pdf?cite=1975%201st%20ex.s.%20c%2095%20§%2030); [1969 c 18 § 1](http://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1969c18.pdf?cite=1969%20c%2018%20§%201); [1965 c 145 § 11.92.150](http://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1965c145.pdf?cite=1965%20c%20145%20§%2011.92.150); prior:  1925 ex.s. c 104 § 1; RRS § 1586-1; \]

## 11.92.160 - Citation for failure to file account or report. (Effective until January 1, 2022.)
Whenever any request for special written notice is served as provided in this section and RCW 11.92.150 as now or hereafter amended, the person making such request may, upon failure of any guardian or limited guardian for any incapacitated person, to file any account or report required by law, petition the court administering such estate for a citation requiring such guardian or limited guardian to file such report or account, or to show cause for failure to do so, and thereupon the court shall issue such citation and hold a hearing thereon and enter such order as is required by the law and the facts.

\[ [1990 c 122 § 34](http://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1990c122.pdf?cite=1990%20c%20122%20§%2034); [1975 1st ex.s. c 95 § 31](http://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1975ex1c95.pdf?cite=1975%201st%20ex.s.%20c%2095%20§%2031); [1965 c 145 § 11.92.160](http://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1965c145.pdf?cite=1965%20c%20145%20§%2011.92.160); [1925 ex.s. c 104 § 2](http://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1925ex1c104.pdf?cite=1925%20ex.s.%20c%20104%20§%202); RRS § 1586-2; \]

## 11.92.170 - Removal of property of nonresident incapacitated person. (Effective until January 1, 2022.)
Whenever it is made to appear that it would be in the best interests of the incapacitated person, the court may order the transfer of property in this state to a guardian or limited guardian of the estate of the incapacitated person appointed in another jurisdiction, or to a person or institution having similar authority with respect to the incapacitated person.

\[ [1990 c 122 § 35](http://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1990c122.pdf?cite=1990%20c%20122%20§%2035); [1977 ex.s. c 309 § 16](http://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1977ex1c309.pdf?cite=1977%20ex.s.%20c%20309%20§%2016); [1975 1st ex.s. c 95 § 32](http://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1975ex1c95.pdf?cite=1975%201st%20ex.s.%20c%2095%20§%2032); [1965 c 145 § 11.92.170](http://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1965c145.pdf?cite=1965%20c%20145%20§%2011.92.170); [1917 c 156 § 217](http://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1917c156.pdf?cite=1917%20c%20156%20§%20217); RRS § 1587; prior: Code 1881 § 1628; [1873 p 320 § 323](http://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/Pages/session_laws.aspx?cite=1873%20p%20320%20§%20323); \]

## 11.92.180 - Compensation and expenses of guardian or limited guardian—Attorney's fees—Department of social and health services clients paying part of costs—Rules. (Effective until January 1, 2022.)
A guardian or limited guardian shall be allowed such compensation for his or her services as guardian or limited guardian as the court shall deem just and reasonable. Guardians and limited guardians shall not be compensated at county or state expense. Additional compensation may be allowed for other administrative costs, including services of an attorney and for other services not provided by the guardian or limited guardian. Where a guardian or limited guardian is an attorney, the guardian or limited guardian shall separately account for time for which compensation is requested for services as a guardian or limited guardian as contrasted to time for which compensation for legal services provided to the guardianship is requested. In all cases, compensation of the guardian or limited guardian and his or her expenses including attorney's fees shall be fixed by the court and may be allowed at any annual or final accounting; but at any time during the administration of the estate, the guardian or limited guardian or his or her attorney may apply to the court for an allowance upon the compensation or necessary expenses of the guardian or limited guardian and for attorney's fees for services already performed. If the court finds that the guardian or limited guardian has failed to discharge his or her duties as such in any respect, it may deny the guardian any compensation whatsoever or may reduce the compensation which would otherwise be allowed. Where the incapacitated person is a department of social and health services client residing in a nursing facility or in a residential or home setting and is required by the department of social and health services to contribute a portion of their income towards the cost of residential or supportive services then the department shall be entitled to notice of proceedings as described in RCW 11.92.150. The amount of guardianship fees and additional compensation for administrative costs shall not exceed the amount allowed by the department of social and health services by rule.

\[ [1995 c 297 § 8](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/1995-96/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/House/1865-S.SL.pdf?cite=1995%20c%20297%20§%208); [1994 c 68 § 1](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/1993-94/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/Senate/6604.SL.pdf?cite=1994%20c%2068%20§%201); [1991 c 289 § 12](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/1991-92/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/House/1510-S.SL.pdf?cite=1991%20c%20289%20§%2012); [1990 c 122 § 36](http://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1990c122.pdf?cite=1990%20c%20122%20§%2036); [1975 1st ex.s. c 95 § 33](http://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1975ex1c95.pdf?cite=1975%201st%20ex.s.%20c%2095%20§%2033); [1965 c 145 § 11.92.180](http://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1965c145.pdf?cite=1965%20c%20145%20§%2011.92.180); [1917 c 156 § 216](http://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1917c156.pdf?cite=1917%20c%20156%20§%20216); RRS § 1586; prior: Code 1881 § 1627; [1855 p 19 § 25](http://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/Pages/session_laws.aspx?cite=1855%20p%2019%20§%2025); \]

## 11.92.185 - Concealed or embezzled property. (Effective until January 1, 2022.)
The court shall have authority to bring before it, in the manner prescribed by RCW 11.48.070, any person or persons suspected of having in his or her possession or having concealed, embezzled, conveyed or disposed of any of the property of the estate of incapacitated persons subject to administration under this title.

\[ [1990 c 122 § 37](http://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1990c122.pdf?cite=1990%20c%20122%20§%2037); [1975 1st ex.s. c 95 § 34](http://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1975ex1c95.pdf?cite=1975%201st%20ex.s.%20c%2095%20§%2034); [1965 c 145 § 11.92.185](http://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1965c145.pdf?cite=1965%20c%20145%20§%2011.92.185); \]

## 11.92.190 - Detention of person in residential placement facility against will prohibited—Effect of court order—Service of notice of residential placement. (Effective until January 1, 2022.)
No residential treatment facility which provides nursing or other care may detain a person within such facility against their will. Any court order, other than an order issued in accordance with the involuntary treatment provisions of chapters 10.77, 71.05, and 72.23 RCW, which purports to authorize such involuntary detention or purports to authorize a guardian or limited guardian to consent to such involuntary detention on behalf of an incapacitated person shall be void and of no force or effect. This section does not apply to the detention of a minor as provided in chapter 71.34 RCW.

Nothing in this section shall be construed to require a court order authorizing placement of an incapacitated person in a residential treatment facility if such order is not otherwise required by law: PROVIDED, That notice of any residential placement of an incapacitated person shall be served, either before or after placement, by the guardian or limited guardian on such person, the guardian ad litem of record, and any attorney of record.

\[ [2016 sp.s. c 29 § 412](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/2015-16/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/House/1713-S3.SL.pdf?cite=2016%20sp.s.%20c%2029%20§%20412); [1996 c 249 § 11](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/1995-96/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/Senate/6257-S.SL.pdf?cite=1996%20c%20249%20§%2011); [1977 ex.s. c 309 § 14](http://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1977ex1c309.pdf?cite=1977%20ex.s.%20c%20309%20§%2014); \]

## 11.92.195 - Incapacitated persons—Right to associate with persons of their choosing. (Effective until January 1, 2022.)
1. Except as otherwise provided in this section, an incapacitated person retains the right to associate with persons of the incapacitated person's choosing. This right includes, but is not limited to, the right to freely communicate and interact with other persons, whether through in-person visits, telephone calls, electronic communication, personal mail, or other means. If the incapacitated person is unable to express consent for communication, visitation, or interaction with another person, or is otherwise unable to make a decision regarding association with another person, a guardian of the incapacitated person, whether full or limited, must:

    a.  Personally inform the incapacitated person of the decision under consideration, using plain language, in a manner calculated to maximize the understanding of the incapacitated person;

    b.  Maximize the incapacitated person's participation in the decision-making process to the greatest extent possible, consistent with the incapacitated person's abilities; and

    c.  Give substantial weight to the incapacitated person's preferences, both expressed and historical.

2. A guardian or limited guardian may not restrict an incapacitated person's right to communicate, visit, interact, or otherwise associate with persons of the incapacitated person's choosing, unless:

    a.  The restriction is specifically authorized by the guardianship court in the court order establishing or modifying the guardianship or limited guardianship under chapter 11.88 RCW;

    b.  The restriction is pursuant to a protection order issued under chapter 74.34 RCW, chapter 26.50 RCW, or other law, that limits contact between the incapacitated person and other persons; or

    c.  [Empty]

        i.  The guardian or limited guardian has good cause to believe that there is an immediate need to restrict an incapacitated person's right to communicate, visit, interact, or otherwise associate with persons of the incapacitated person's choosing in order to protect the incapacitated person from abuse, neglect, abandonment, or financial exploitation, as those terms are defined in RCW 74.34.020, or to protect the incapacitated person from activities that unnecessarily impose significant distress on the incapacitated person; and

        ii.  Within fourteen calendar days of imposing the restriction under (c)(i) of this subsection, the guardian or limited guardian files a petition for a protection order under chapter 74.34 RCW. The immediate need restriction may remain in place until the court has heard and issued an order or decision on the petition.

3. A protection order under chapter 74.34 RCW issued to protect an incapacitated person as described in subsection (2)(c)(ii) of this section:

    a.  Must include written findings of fact and conclusions of law;

    b.  May not be more restrictive than necessary to protect the incapacitated person from abuse, neglect, abandonment, or financial exploitation as those terms are defined in RCW 74.34.020; and

    c.  May not deny communication, visitation, interaction, or other association between the incapacitated person and another person unless the court finds that placing reasonable time, place, or manner restrictions is unlikely to sufficiently protect the incapacitated person from abuse, neglect, abandonment, or financial exploitation as those terms are defined in RCW 74.34.020.

\[ [2017 c 268 § 1](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/2017-18/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/House/1402-S2.SL.pdf?cite=2017%20c%20268%20§%201); \]

