# 43.89 - Teletypewriter communications network.
* [43.89.010 - Communications network—Establishment—Use—Charges—Duties of chief of state patrol.](#4389010---communications-networkestablishmentusechargesduties-of-chief-of-state-patrol)
* [43.89.030 - Connection with and participation in network by political subdivisions.](#4389030---connection-with-and-participation-in-network-by-political-subdivisions)
* [43.89.050 - Transfer of powers, duties and functions not to terminate or affect state liability.](#4389050---transfer-of-powers-duties-and-functions-not-to-terminate-or-affect-state-liability)
## 43.89.010 - Communications network—Establishment—Use—Charges—Duties of chief of state patrol.
The chief of the Washington state patrol is hereby authorized to establish a communications network which will inter-connect the law enforcement agencies of the state and its political subdivisions into a unified written communications system. The chief of the Washington state patrol is authorized to lease or purchase such facilities and equipment as may be necessary to establish and maintain the communications network.

1. The communications network shall be used exclusively for the official business of the state, and the official business of any city, county, city and county, or other public agency.

2. This section does not prohibit the occasional use of the state's communications network by any other state or public agency thereof when the messages transmitted relate to the enforcement of the criminal laws of the state.

3. The chief of the Washington state patrol shall fix the monthly operational charge to be paid by any department or agency of state government, or any city, county, city and county, or other public agency participating in the communications network: PROVIDED, That in computing charges to be made against a city, county, or city and county the state shall bear at least fifty percent of the costs of such service as its share in providing a modern unified communications network to the law enforcement agencies of the state. Of the fees collected pursuant to this section, one-half shall be deposited in the motor vehicle fund and one-half shall be deposited in the state patrol highway account. However, for the 2009-2011 fiscal biennium the fees collected pursuant to this section shall be deposited in the state general fund.

4. The chief of the Washington state patrol is authorized to arrange for the connection of the communications network with the law enforcement communications system of any adjacent state, or the Province of British Columbia, Canada.

\[ [2010 1st sp.s. c 37 § 930](https://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/2009-10/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/Senate/6444-S.SL.pdf?cite=2010%201st%20sp.s.%20c%2037%20§%20930); [2000 2nd sp.s. c 4 § 7](https://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/1999-00/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/Senate/6856-S2.SL.pdf?cite=2000%202nd%20sp.s.%20c%204%20§%207); [1993 sp.s. c 23 § 63](https://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/1993-94/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/Senate/5972-S.SL.pdf?cite=1993%20sp.s.%20c%2023%20§%2063); [1965 ex.s. c 60 § 2](https://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1965ex1c60.pdf?cite=1965%20ex.s.%20c%2060%20§%202); [1965 c 8 § 43.89.010](https://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1965c8.pdf?cite=1965%20c%208%20§%2043.89.010); [1963 c 160 § 1](https://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1963c160.pdf?cite=1963%20c%20160%20§%201); \]

## 43.89.030 - Connection with and participation in network by political subdivisions.
Any city, county, city and county, or other public agency may connect with and participate in the teletypewriter communications network subject to the rules, regulations, procedures and methods of operation adopted by the state communications advisory committee: PROVIDED, That such city, county, city and county, or other public agency shall first agree to pay such installation charges as may be necessary for such connection and such monthly operational charges as may be established by the chief of the Washington state patrol.

\[ [1965 ex.s. c 60 § 4](https://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1965ex1c60.pdf?cite=1965%20ex.s.%20c%2060%20§%204); [1965 c 8 § 43.89.030](https://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1965c8.pdf?cite=1965%20c%208%20§%2043.89.030); [1963 c 160 § 3](https://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1963c160.pdf?cite=1963%20c%20160%20§%203); \]

## 43.89.050 - Transfer of powers, duties and functions not to terminate or affect state liability.
The transfer of the powers, duties, and functions relating to the state teletypewriter communication network from the director of budget to the chief of the Washington state patrol shall not terminate or affect the liability of the state accruing with respect to such communications network to any person, company, or corporation.

\[ [1965 ex.s. c 60 § 5](https://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1965ex1c60.pdf?cite=1965%20ex.s.%20c%2060%20§%205); \]

