# 43.09 - State auditor.
* [43.09.010 - Residence—Office—Bond—Oath.](#4309010---residenceofficebondoath)
* [43.09.020 - Auditor of public accounts.](#4309020---auditor-of-public-accounts)
* [43.09.025 - Deputy auditors—Assistant directors.](#4309025---deputy-auditorsassistant-directors)
* [43.09.035 - Assistants—Personnel.](#4309035---assistantspersonnel)
* [43.09.045 - Contracts with certified public accountants.](#4309045---contracts-with-certified-public-accountants)
* [43.09.050 - General duties of auditor.](#4309050---general-duties-of-auditor)
* [43.09.055 - Audit of entities with state contracts or grants—Costs.](#4309055---audit-of-entities-with-state-contracts-or-grantscosts)
* [43.09.065 - Audit of entities with state contracts or grants—Report regarding criminal misuse of public moneys.](#4309065---audit-of-entities-with-state-contracts-or-grantsreport-regarding-criminal-misuse-of-public-moneys)
* [43.09.165 - Subpoenas—Compulsory process—Witnesses—Oaths—Testimony—Penalty.](#4309165---subpoenascompulsory-processwitnessesoathstestimonypenalty)
* [43.09.166 - Subpoenas—Court approval—Process.](#4309166---subpoenascourt-approvalprocess)
* [43.09.170 - May administer oaths.](#4309170---may-administer-oaths)
* [43.09.180 - Seal—Copies of documents as evidence.](#4309180---sealcopies-of-documents-as-evidence)
* [43.09.185 - Loss of public funds—Illegal activity—Report to state auditor's office.](#4309185---loss-of-public-fundsillegal-activityreport-to-state-auditors-office)
* [43.09.186 - Toll-free efficiency hotline—Duties—Annual overview and update.](#4309186---toll-free-efficiency-hotlinedutiesannual-overview-and-update)
* [43.09.188 - Regulatory fairness act—Performance reviews.](#4309188---regulatory-fairness-actperformance-reviews)
* [43.09.200 - Local government accounting—Uniform system of accounting.](#4309200---local-government-accountinguniform-system-of-accounting)
* [43.09.205 - Local government accounting—Costs of public works—Standard form.](#4309205---local-government-accountingcosts-of-public-worksstandard-form)
* [43.09.210 - Local government accounting—Separate accounts for each fund or activity—Exemptions.](#4309210---local-government-accountingseparate-accounts-for-each-fund-or-activityexemptions)
* [43.09.220 - Local government accounting—Separate accounts for public service industries.](#4309220---local-government-accountingseparate-accounts-for-public-service-industries)
* [43.09.230 - Local government accounting—Annual reports—Comparative statistics.](#4309230---local-government-accountingannual-reportscomparative-statistics)
* [43.09.240 - Local government accounting—Public officers and employees—Duty to account and report—Removal from office—Deposit of collections.](#4309240---local-government-accountingpublic-officers-and-employeesduty-to-account-and-reportremoval-from-officedeposit-of-collections)
* [43.09.245 - Local government accounting—Examination of financial affairs.](#4309245---local-government-accountingexamination-of-financial-affairs)
* [43.09.260 - Local government accounting—Examination of local governments—Reports—Action by attorney general.](#4309260---local-government-accountingexamination-of-local-governmentsreportsaction-by-attorney-general)
* [43.09.270 - Local government accounting—Expense of audit, what constitutes.](#4309270---local-government-accountingexpense-of-audit-what-constitutes)
* [43.09.280 - Local government accounting—Expense of examination.](#4309280---local-government-accountingexpense-of-examination)
* [43.09.2801 - Local government accounting—Expense of audit—Additional charge.](#43092801---local-government-accountingexpense-of-auditadditional-charge)
* [43.09.281 - Appeal procedure to be adopted—Inclusion of number and disposition of appeals in annual report.](#4309281---appeal-procedure-to-be-adoptedinclusion-of-number-and-disposition-of-appeals-in-annual-report)
* [43.09.282 - Local government accounting—Municipal revolving account—Records of auditing costs.](#4309282---local-government-accountingmunicipal-revolving-accountrecords-of-auditing-costs)
* [43.09.285 - Joint operations by municipal corporations or political subdivisions—Deposit and control of funds.](#4309285---joint-operations-by-municipal-corporations-or-political-subdivisionsdeposit-and-control-of-funds)
* [43.09.2851 - Repayment of amounts charged to another fund within same political subdivision to be credited to original fund or appropriation—Expenditure.](#43092851---repayment-of-amounts-charged-to-another-fund-within-same-political-subdivision-to-be-credited-to-original-fund-or-appropriationexpenditure)
* [43.09.2853 - Municipal corporations authorized to establish line of credit for payment of warrants—Interest.](#43092853---municipal-corporations-authorized-to-establish-line-of-credit-for-payment-of-warrantsinterest)
* [43.09.2855 - Local governments—Use of credit cards.](#43092855---local-governmentsuse-of-credit-cards)
* [43.09.2856 - School district audits—School district compliance with RCW  28A.150.276 and  28A.505.240—Report of findings.](#43092856---school-district-auditsschool-district-compliance-with-rcw--28a150276-and--28a505240report-of-findings)
* [43.09.290 - Post-audit of state agencies—Definitions.](#4309290---post-audit-of-state-agenciesdefinitions)
* [43.09.310 - Audit of statewide combined financial statements—Post-audits of state agencies—Periodic audits—Reports—Filing.](#4309310---audit-of-statewide-combined-financial-statementspost-audits-of-state-agenciesperiodic-auditsreportsfiling)
* [43.09.312 - Post-audits of state agencies under RCW  43.09.310—Noncompliance—Remediation—Referral to attorney general.](#4309312---post-audits-of-state-agencies-under-rcw--4309310noncomplianceremediationreferral-to-attorney-general)
* [43.09.330 - Audit disclosing malfeasance or nonfeasance—Action by attorney general.](#4309330---audit-disclosing-malfeasance-or-nonfeasanceaction-by-attorney-general)
* [43.09.340 - Post-audit of books of state auditor.](#4309340---post-audit-of-books-of-state-auditor)
* [43.09.410 - Auditing services revolving account—Created—Purpose.](#4309410---auditing-services-revolving-accountcreatedpurpose)
* [43.09.412 - Auditing services revolving account—Transfers and payments into account—Allotments to state auditor.](#4309412---auditing-services-revolving-accounttransfers-and-payments-into-accountallotments-to-state-auditor)
* [43.09.414 - Auditing services revolving account—Disbursements.](#4309414---auditing-services-revolving-accountdisbursements)
* [43.09.416 - Auditing services revolving account—Allocation of costs to funds, accounts, and agencies—Billing rate.](#4309416---auditing-services-revolving-accountallocation-of-costs-to-funds-accounts-and-agenciesbilling-rate)
* [43.09.418 - Auditing services revolving account—Direct payments from state agencies.](#4309418---auditing-services-revolving-accountdirect-payments-from-state-agencies)
* [43.09.420 - Audit of revolving, local, and other funds and accounts.](#4309420---audit-of-revolving-local-and-other-funds-and-accounts)
* [43.09.430 - Performance audits—Definition.](#4309430---performance-auditsdefinition)
* [43.09.440 - Performance audits—Comments.](#4309440---performance-auditscomments)
* [43.09.455 - Performance audits—Follow-up and corrective action—Progress reports.](#4309455---performance-auditsfollow-up-and-corrective-actionprogress-reports)
* [43.09.465 - Comprehensive performance audit of state printing services.](#4309465---comprehensive-performance-audit-of-state-printing-services)
* [43.09.466 - Comprehensive performance audit of statewide sexual assault tracking system. (Expires July 1, 2023.)](#4309466---comprehensive-performance-audit-of-statewide-sexual-assault-tracking-system-expires-july-1-2023)
* [43.09.470 - Comprehensive performance audits—Scope—Reports.](#4309470---comprehensive-performance-auditsscopereports)
* [43.09.471 - Short title—Effective date—2006 c 1 (Initiative Measure No. 900).](#4309471---short-titleeffective-date2006-c-1-initiative-measure-no-900)
* [43.09.475 - Performance audits of government account.](#4309475---performance-audits-of-government-account)
* [43.09.480 - Long-term services and supports trust program—Audit—Report.](#4309480---long-term-services-and-supports-trust-programauditreport)
## 43.09.010 - Residence—Office—Bond—Oath.
The state auditor shall reside and keep his or her office at the seat of government. Before entering upon his or her duties he or she shall execute and deliver to the secretary of state a bond to the state in the sum of fifty thousand dollars, to be approved by the governor, conditioned for the faithful performance of all duties required by law. He or she shall take an oath of office before any person authorized to administer oaths, and file a copy thereof, together with the required bond, in the office of the secretary of state.

\[ [1995 c 301 § 1](https://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/1995-96/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/House/1889.SL.pdf?cite=1995%20c%20301%20§%201); [1965 c 8 § 43.09.010](https://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1965c8.pdf?cite=1965%20c%208%20§%2043.09.010); [1890 p 634 § 1](https://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1890pam1.pdf#page=634?cite=1890%20p%20634%20§%201); RRS § 10996; prior: Code 1881 § 2566; [1871 p 96 § 1](https://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/Pages/session_laws.aspx?cite=1871%20p%2096%20§%201); [1854 p 409 § 2](https://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/Pages/session_laws.aspx?cite=1854%20p%20409%20§%202); \]

## 43.09.020 - Auditor of public accounts.
The auditor shall be auditor of public accounts, and shall have such powers and perform such duties in connection therewith as may be prescribed by law.

\[ [1989 c 140 § 1](https://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1989c140.pdf?cite=1989%20c%20140%20§%201); [1965 c 8 § 43.09.020](https://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1965c8.pdf?cite=1965%20c%208%20§%2043.09.020); [1890 p 635 § 2](https://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1890pam2.pdf#page=635?cite=1890%20p%20635%20§%202); RRS § 10997; prior: Code 1881 § 2567; [1871 p 97 § 4](https://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/Pages/session_laws.aspx?cite=1871%20p%2097%20§%204); [1854 p 409 § 3](https://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/Pages/session_laws.aspx?cite=1854%20p%20409%20§%203); \]

## 43.09.025 - Deputy auditors—Assistant directors.
The state auditor may appoint deputies and assistant directors as necessary to carry out the duties of the office of the state auditor. These individuals serve at the pleasure of the state auditor and are exempt from the provisions of chapter 41.06 RCW as stated in RCW 41.06.070(1)(v).

\[ [2020 c 18 § 14](https://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/2019-20/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/House/2205-S.SL.pdf?cite=2020%20c%2018%20§%2014); [1995 c 301 § 2](https://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/1995-96/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/House/1889.SL.pdf?cite=1995%20c%20301%20§%202); \]

## 43.09.035 - Assistants—Personnel.
The state auditor may appoint and employ other assistants and personnel necessary to carry out the work of the office of the state auditor.

\[ [1995 c 301 § 3](https://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/1995-96/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/House/1889.SL.pdf?cite=1995%20c%20301%20§%203); \]

## 43.09.045 - Contracts with certified public accountants.
The state auditor may contract with public accountants certified in Washington to carry out those portions of the duties of auditing state agencies and local governments as the state auditor may determine.

\[ [1995 c 301 § 4](https://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/1995-96/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/House/1889.SL.pdf?cite=1995%20c%20301%20§%204); \]

## 43.09.050 - General duties of auditor.
The auditor shall:

1. Except as otherwise specifically provided by law, audit the accounts of all collectors of the revenue and other holders of public money required by law to pay the same into the treasury;

2. In his or her discretion, inspect the books of any person charged with the receipt, safekeeping, and disbursement of public moneys;

3. Investigate improper governmental activity under chapter 42.40 RCW;

4. Inform the attorney general in writing of the necessity for the attorney general to direct prosecutions in the name of the state for all official delinquencies in relation to the assessment, collection, and payment of the revenue, against all persons who, by any means, become possessed of public money or property, and fail to pay over or deliver the same, and against all debtors of the state;

5. Give information in writing to the legislature, whenever required, upon any subject relating to the financial affairs of the state, or touching any duties of his or her office;

6. Report to the director of financial management in writing the names of all persons who have received any moneys belonging to the state, and have not accounted therefor;

7. Authenticate with his or her official seal papers issued from his or her office;

8. Make his or her official report annually on or before the 31st of December.

\[ [1992 c 118 § 6](https://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/1991-92/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/Senate/5121-S.SL.pdf?cite=1992%20c%20118%20§%206); [1979 c 151 § 91](https://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1979c151.pdf?cite=1979%20c%20151%20§%2091); [1977 ex.s. c 144 § 7](https://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1977ex1c144.pdf?cite=1977%20ex.s.%20c%20144%20§%207); [1977 c 75 § 40](https://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1977c75.pdf?cite=1977%20c%2075%20§%2040); [1971 ex.s. c 170 § 1](https://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1971ex1c170.pdf?cite=1971%20ex.s.%20c%20170%20§%201); [1965 c 8 § 43.09.050](https://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1965c8.pdf?cite=1965%20c%208%20§%2043.09.050); prior:  1890 p 636 § 5; RRS § 11001; prior: Code 1881 § 2570; [1854 p 410 § 5](https://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/Pages/session_laws.aspx?cite=1854%20p%20410%20§%205); \]

## 43.09.055 - Audit of entities with state contracts or grants—Costs.
The state auditor may, where there is reasonable cause to believe that a misuse of state moneys has occurred, conduct an audit of financial and legal compliance of any entity that receives public moneys through contract or grant in return for services. This authority includes examinations of not-for-profit corporations who provide personal services to a state agency or to clients of a state agency. Such a financial audit shall be performed in a manner consistent with this chapter, and may be performed according to an agreed upon procedures engagement as in the existing 1998 standards of the American institute of certified public accountants professional standards section 600.

The state auditor may charge the contracting agency, whether state or local, for the costs of an audit of a not-for-profit corporation that receives public moneys through contract or grant in return for services. Any contracting agency that is responsible to the state auditor for such costs shall use due diligence to recover costs from the audited entity.

\[ [1998 c 232 § 3](https://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/1997-98/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/House/2881-S2.SL.pdf?cite=1998%20c%20232%20§%203); \]

## 43.09.065 - Audit of entities with state contracts or grants—Report regarding criminal misuse of public moneys.
If after a financial audit of an entity that receives public moneys under contract or grant in return for services, there is reasonable cause to believe that a criminal misuse of public moneys has occurred, the office of the state auditor, within thirty days from receipt of the report, shall deliver a copy of the report to the appropriate local prosecuting authority.

\[ [1998 c 232 § 4](https://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/1997-98/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/House/2881-S2.SL.pdf?cite=1998%20c%20232%20§%204); \]

## 43.09.165 - Subpoenas—Compulsory process—Witnesses—Oaths—Testimony—Penalty.
1. The state auditor, his or her employees and every person legally appointed to perform such service, may issue subpoenas and compulsory process and direct the service thereof by any constable or sheriff, compel the attendance of witnesses and the production of books and papers before him or her at any designated time and place, and may administer oaths.

2. When any person summoned to appear and give testimony neglects or refuses to do so, or neglects or refuses to answer any question that may be put to him or her touching any matter under examination, or to produce any books or papers required, the person making such examination shall apply to a superior court judge of the proper county to issue a subpoena for the appearance of such person before him or her; and the judge shall order the issuance of a subpoena for the appearance of such person forthwith before him or her to give testimony; and if any person so summoned fails to appear, or appearing, refuses to testify, or to produce any books or papers required, he or she shall be subject to like proceedings and penalties for contempt as witnesses in the superior court.

3. Willful false swearing in any such examination is perjury under chapter 9A.72 RCW.

\[ [2003 c 53 § 225](https://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/2003-04/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/Senate/5758.SL.pdf?cite=2003%20c%2053%20§%20225); [1995 c 301 § 5](https://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/1995-96/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/House/1889.SL.pdf?cite=1995%20c%20301%20§%205); \]

## 43.09.166 - Subpoenas—Court approval—Process.
1. In addition to the authority granted in RCW 43.09.165, the state auditor and his or her authorized assistants may apply for and obtain a superior court order approving and authorizing a subpoena in advance of its issuance. The application may be made in the county where the subpoenaed person resides or is found, or the county where the subpoenaed records or documents are located, or in Thurston county. The application must (a) state that an order is sought pursuant to this subsection; (b) adequately specify the records, documents, or testimony; and (c) declare under oath that an investigation is being conducted for a lawfully authorized purpose related to an investigation within the state auditor's authority and that the subpoenaed documents or testimony are reasonably related to an investigation within the state auditor's authority.

2. Where the application under this section is made to the satisfaction of the court, the court must issue an order approving the subpoena. An order under this section constitutes authority of law for the state auditor to subpoena the records or testimony.

3. The state auditor and his or her authorized assistants may seek approval and a court may issue an order under this section without prior notice to any person, including the person to whom the subpoena is directed and the person who is the subject of an investigation.

\[ [2013 c 50 § 2](https://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/2013-14/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/Senate/5446.SL.pdf?cite=2013%20c%2050%20§%202); \]

## 43.09.170 - May administer oaths.
The state auditor may administer all oaths required by law in matters pertaining to the duties of his or her office.

\[ [1995 c 301 § 6](https://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/1995-96/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/House/1889.SL.pdf?cite=1995%20c%20301%20§%206); [1965 c 8 § 43.09.170](https://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1965c8.pdf?cite=1965%20c%208%20§%2043.09.170); [1890 p 641 § 23](https://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1890pam23.pdf#page=641?cite=1890%20p%20641%20§%2023); RRS § 11017; prior: Code 1881 § 2586; \]

## 43.09.180 - Seal—Copies of documents as evidence.
The state auditor shall keep a seal of office for the identification of all papers, writings, and documents required by law to be certified by him or her, and copies authenticated and certified of all papers and documents lawfully deposited in his or her office shall be received in evidence with the same effect as the originals.

\[ [1995 c 301 § 7](https://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/1995-96/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/House/1889.SL.pdf?cite=1995%20c%20301%20§%207); [1965 c 8 § 43.09.180](https://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1965c8.pdf?cite=1965%20c%208%20§%2043.09.180); [1890 p 641 § 24](https://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1890pam24.pdf#page=641?cite=1890%20p%20641%20§%2024); RRS § 11018; prior: Code 1881 § 2587; \]

## 43.09.185 - Loss of public funds—Illegal activity—Report to state auditor's office.
State agencies and local governments shall immediately report to the state auditor's office known or suspected loss of public funds or assets or other illegal activity. The state auditor must adopt policies as necessary to implement this section.

\[ [2022 c 148 § 1](https://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/2021-22/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/Senate/5002.SL.pdf?cite=2022%20c%20148%20§%201); [1995 c 301 § 8](https://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/1995-96/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/House/1889.SL.pdf?cite=1995%20c%20301%20§%208); \]

## 43.09.186 - Toll-free efficiency hotline—Duties—Annual overview and update.
1. Within existing funds, the state auditor must establish a toll-free telephone line that is available to public employees and members of the public to recommend measures to improve efficiency in state and local government and to report waste, inefficiency, or abuse, as well as examples of efficiency or outstanding achievement, by state and local agencies, public employees, or persons under contract with state and local agencies.

2. The state auditor must prepare information that explains the purpose of the hotline, and the hotline telephone number must be prominently displayed in the information. Hotline information must be posted in all government offices in locations where it is most likely to be seen by the public. The state auditor must publicize the availability of the toll-free hotline through print and electronic media and other means of communication with the public.

3. The state auditor must designate staff to be responsible for processing recommendations for improving efficiency and reports of waste, inefficiency, or abuse received through the hotline. The state auditor must conduct an initial review of each recommendation for efficiency and report of waste, inefficiency, or abuse made by public employees and members of the public. Following the initial review, the state auditor must determine which assertions require further examination or audit under the auditor's current authority and must assign qualified staff.

4. The identity of a person making a report through the hotline, by email through the state auditor's website, or other means of communication is confidential at all times unless the person making a report consents to disclosure by written waiver, or until the investigation described in subsection (3) of this section is complete. All documents related to the report and subsequent investigation are also confidential until completion of the investigation or audit or when the documents are otherwise statutorily exempt from public disclosure.

5. The state auditor must prepare a written determination of the results of the investigation performed, including any background information that the auditor deems necessary. The state auditor must report publicly the conclusions of each investigation and recommend ways to correct any deficiency and to improve efficiency. The reports must be distributed to the affected state agencies.

6. The state auditor must provide an annual overview and update of hotline investigations, including the results and efficiencies achieved, to the legislature and to the appropriate legislative committees.

\[ [2007 c 41 § 1](https://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/2007-08/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/Senate/5513.SL.pdf?cite=2007%20c%2041%20§%201); \]

## 43.09.188 - Regulatory fairness act—Performance reviews.
The state auditor shall conduct a performance review of agency compliance with the regulatory fairness act, pursuant to chapter 19.85 RCW. The performance review must be completed no earlier than June 30, 2020, and subsequent reviews must be completed periodically thereafter. Factors used to determine the frequency of subsequent reviews include the degree to which agencies are found to be in compliance with the act. The auditor must report his or her findings to the legislature, and any recommendations, by June 30, 2021, and after every subsequent review.

\[ [2017 c 53 § 4](https://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/2017-18/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/House/1120-S2.SL.pdf?cite=2017%20c%2053%20§%204); \]

## 43.09.200 - Local government accounting—Uniform system of accounting.
The state auditor shall formulate, prescribe, and install a system of accounting and reporting for all local governments, which shall be uniform for every public institution, and every public office, and every public account of the same class.

The system shall exhibit true accounts and detailed statements of funds collected, received, and expended for account of the public for any purpose whatever, and by all public officers, employees, or other persons.

The accounts shall show the receipt, use, and disposition of all public property, and the income, if any, derived therefrom; all sources of public income, and the amounts due and received from each source; all receipts, vouchers, and other documents kept, or required to be kept, necessary to isolate and prove the validity of every transaction; all statements and reports made or required to be made, for the internal administration of the office to which they pertain; and all reports published or required to be published, for the information of the people regarding any and all details of the financial administration of public affairs.

\[ [1995 c 301 § 9](https://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/1995-96/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/House/1889.SL.pdf?cite=1995%20c%20301%20§%209); [1965 c 8 § 43.09.200](https://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1965c8.pdf?cite=1965%20c%208%20§%2043.09.200); [1909 c 76 § 2](https://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1909c76.pdf?cite=1909%20c%2076%20§%202); RRS § 9952; \]

## 43.09.205 - Local government accounting—Costs of public works—Standard form.
The state auditor shall prescribe a standard form with which the accounts and records of costs of all local governments shall be maintained as required under RCW 39.04.070.

\[ [1995 c 301 § 10](https://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/1995-96/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/House/1889.SL.pdf?cite=1995%20c%20301%20§%2010); [1987 c 120 § 4](https://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1987c120.pdf?cite=1987%20c%20120%20§%204); \]

## 43.09.210 - Local government accounting—Separate accounts for each fund or activity—Exemptions.
1. Separate accounts shall be kept for every appropriation or fund of a taxing or legislative body showing date and manner of each payment made therefrom, the name, address, and vocation of each person, organization, corporation, or association to whom paid, and for what purpose paid.

2. Separate accounts shall be kept for each department, public improvement, undertaking, institution, and public service industry under the jurisdiction of every taxing body.

3. All service rendered by, or property transferred from, one department, public improvement, undertaking, institution, or public service industry to another, shall be paid for at its true and full value by the department, public improvement, undertaking, institution, or public service industry receiving the same, and no department, public improvement, undertaking, institution, or public service industry shall benefit in any financial manner whatever by an appropriation or fund made for the support of another.

4. All unexpended balances of appropriations shall be transferred to the fund from which appropriated, whenever the account with an appropriation is closed.

5. This section does not apply to:

   a. Agency surplus personal property handled under RCW 43.19.1919(1)(e); or

   b. The transfer, lease, or other disposal of surplus property for public benefit purposes, as provided under RCW 39.33.015.

\[ [2018 c 217 § 5](https://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/2017-18/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/House/2382-S3.SL.pdf?cite=2018%20c%20217%20§%205); [2000 c 183 § 2](https://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/1999-00/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/House/2650.SL.pdf?cite=2000%20c%20183%20§%202); [1965 c 8 § 43.09.210](https://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1965c8.pdf?cite=1965%20c%208%20§%2043.09.210); [1909 c 76 § 3](https://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1909c76.pdf?cite=1909%20c%2076%20§%203); RRS § 9953; \]

## 43.09.220 - Local government accounting—Separate accounts for public service industries.
Separate accounts shall be kept for every public service industry of every local government, which shall show the true and entire cost of the ownership and operation thereof, the amount collected annually by general or special taxation for service rendered to the public, and the amount and character of the service rendered therefor, and the amount collected annually from private users for service rendered to them, and the amount and character of the service rendered therefor.

\[ [1995 c 301 § 11](https://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/1995-96/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/House/1889.SL.pdf?cite=1995%20c%20301%20§%2011); [1965 c 8 § 43.09.220](https://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1965c8.pdf?cite=1965%20c%208%20§%2043.09.220); [1909 c 76 § 4](https://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1909c76.pdf?cite=1909%20c%2076%20§%204); RRS § 9954; \]

## 43.09.230 - Local government accounting—Annual reports—Comparative statistics.
1. As used in this section:

   a. "Special purpose district" means every municipal and quasi-municipal corporation other than counties, cities, and towns. Such special purpose districts include, but are not limited to, water-sewer districts, fire protection districts, port districts, public utility districts, special districts as defined in RCW 85.38.010, lake and beach management districts, conservation districts, and irrigation districts.

   b. "Unauditable" means a special purpose district that the state auditor has determined to be incapable of being audited because the special purpose district has improperly maintained, failed to maintain, or failed to submit adequate accounts, records, files, or reports for an audit to be completed.

2. The state auditor shall require from every local government financial reports covering the full period of each fiscal year, in accordance with the forms and methods prescribed by the state auditor, which shall be uniform for all accounts of the same class.

Such reports shall be prepared, certified, and filed with the state auditor within one hundred fifty days after the close of each fiscal year. The state auditor may allow local governments a thirty-day extension for filing annual fiscal reports if the governor has declared an emergency pursuant to RCW 43.06.210.

The reports shall contain accurate statements, in summarized form, of all collections made, or receipts received, by the officers from all sources; all accounts due the public treasury, but not collected; and all expenditures for every purpose, and by what authority authorized; and also: (a) A statement of all costs of ownership and operation, and of all income, of each and every public service industry owned and operated by a local government; (b) a statement of the entire public debt of every local government, to which power has been delegated by the state to create a public debt, showing the purpose for which each item of the debt was created, and the provisions made for the payment thereof; and (c) a classified statement of all receipts and expenditures by any public institution together with such other information as may be required by the state auditor.

The reports shall be certified as to their correctness by the state auditor, the state auditor's deputies, or other person legally authorized to make such certification.

Their substance shall be published in an annual volume of comparative statistics at the expense of the state as a public document.

3. [Empty]

   a. [Empty]

      i. On or before December 31, 2020, and on or before December 31st of each year thereafter, the state auditor must search available records and notify the legislative authority of a county if any special purpose districts, located wholly or partially within the county, have been determined to be unauditable. If the boundaries of the special purpose district are located within more than one county, the state auditor must notify all legislative authorities of the counties within which the boundaries of the special purpose district lie.

      ii. If a county has been notified as provided in (a)(i) of this subsection (3), the special purpose district and the county auditor, acting on behalf of the special purpose district, are prohibited from issuing any warrants against the funds of the special purpose district until the district has had its report certified by the state auditor.

      iii. Notwithstanding (a)(ii) of this subsection (3), a county may authorize the special purpose district and the county auditor to issue warrants against the funds of the special purpose district:

           A.  In order to prevent the discontinuation or interruption of any district services;

           B.  For emergency or public health purposes; or

           C.  To allow the district to carry out any district duties or responsibilities.

   b. [Empty]

      i. On or before December 31, 2020, and on or before December 31st of each year thereafter, the state auditor must search available records and notify the state treasurer if any special purpose districts have been determined to be unauditable.

      ii. If the state treasurer has been notified as provided in (b)(i) of this subsection (3), the state treasurer may not distribute any local sales and use taxes imposed by a special purpose district to the district until the district has had its report certified by the state auditor.

\[ [2022 c 148 § 2](https://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/2021-22/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/Senate/5002.SL.pdf?cite=2022%20c%20148%20§%202); [2021 c 122 § 6](https://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/2021-22/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/House/1271.SL.pdf?cite=2021%20c%20122%20§%206); [2020 c 179 § 1](https://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/2019-20/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/House/2588-S.SL.pdf?cite=2020%20c%20179%20§%201); [1995 c 301 § 12](https://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/1995-96/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/House/1889.SL.pdf?cite=1995%20c%20301%20§%2012); [1993 c 18 § 2](https://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/1993-94/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/Senate/5070.SL.pdf?cite=1993%20c%2018%20§%202); [1989 c 168 § 1](https://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1989c168.pdf?cite=1989%20c%20168%20§%201); [1977 c 75 § 41](https://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1977c75.pdf?cite=1977%20c%2075%20§%2041); [1965 c 8 § 43.09.230](https://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1965c8.pdf?cite=1965%20c%208%20§%2043.09.230); [1909 c 76 § 5](https://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1909c76.pdf?cite=1909%20c%2076%20§%205); RRS § 9955; \]

## 43.09.240 - Local government accounting—Public officers and employees—Duty to account and report—Removal from office—Deposit of collections.
Every public officer and employee of a local government shall keep all accounts of his or her office in the form prescribed and make all reports required by the state auditor. Any public officer or employee who refuses or willfully neglects to perform such duties shall be subject to removal from office in an appropriate proceeding for that purpose brought by the attorney general or by any prosecuting attorney.

Every public officer and employee, whose duty it is to collect or receive payments due or for the use of the public shall deposit such moneys collected or received by him or her with the treasurer of the local government once every twenty-four consecutive hours. The treasurer may in his or her discretion grant an exception where such daily transfers would not be administratively practical or feasible as long as the treasurer has received a written request from the department, district, or agency, and where the department, district, or agency certifies that the money is held with proper safekeeping and that the entity carries out proper theft protection to reduce risk of loss of funds. Exceptions granted by the treasurer shall state the frequency with which deposits are required as long as no exception exceeds a time period greater than one deposit per week.

In case a public officer or employee collects or receives funds for the account of a local government of which he or she is an officer or employee, the treasurer shall, by Friday of each week, pay to the proper officer of the local government for the account of which the collection was made or payment received, the full amount collected or received during the current week for the account of the district.

\[ [2002 c 168 § 3](https://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/2001-02/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/Senate/6466.SL.pdf?cite=2002%20c%20168%20§%203); [1995 c 301 § 13](https://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/1995-96/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/House/1889.SL.pdf?cite=1995%20c%20301%20§%2013); [1991 c 245 § 13](https://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/1991-92/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/House/1316-S.SL.pdf?cite=1991%20c%20245%20§%2013); [1965 c 8 § 43.09.240](https://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1965c8.pdf?cite=1965%20c%208%20§%2043.09.240); [1963 c 209 § 2](https://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1963c209.pdf?cite=1963%20c%20209%20§%202); [1911 c 30 § 1](https://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1911c30.pdf?cite=1911%20c%2030%20§%201); [1909 c 76 § 6](https://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1909c76.pdf?cite=1909%20c%2076%20§%206); RRS § 9956; prior:  1890 p 638 § 11; Code 1881 § 2577; [1854 p 411 § 7](https://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/Pages/session_laws.aspx?cite=1854%20p%20411%20§%207); \]

## 43.09.245 - Local government accounting—Examination of financial affairs.
The state auditor has the power to examine all the financial affairs of every local government and its officers and employees.

\[ [1995 c 301 § 14](https://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/1995-96/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/House/1889.SL.pdf?cite=1995%20c%20301%20§%2014); \]

## 43.09.260 - Local government accounting—Examination of local governments—Reports—Action by attorney general.
1. The examination of the financial affairs of all local governments shall be made at such reasonable, periodic intervals as the state auditor shall determine. However, an examination of the financial affairs of all local governments shall be made at least once in every three years, and an examination of individual local government health and welfare benefit plans and local government self-insurance programs shall be made at least once every two years.

2. During the 2009-2011 fiscal biennium, the state auditor shall conduct audits no more often than once every two years of local governments with annual general fund revenues of ten million dollars or less and no findings of impropriety for the three-year period immediately preceding the audit period. This subsection does not prohibit the state auditor from conducting audits: (a) To address suspected fraud or irregular conduct; (b) at the request of the local government governing body; or (c) as required by federal laws or regulations.

3. The term local governments for purposes of this chapter includes but is not limited to all counties, cities, and other political subdivisions, municipal corporations, and quasi-municipal corporations, however denominated.

4. The state auditor shall establish a schedule to govern the auditing of local governments which shall include: A designation of the various classifications of local governments; a designation of the frequency for auditing each type of local government; and a description of events which cause a more frequent audit to be conducted.

5. On every such examination, inquiry shall be made as to the financial condition and resources of the local government; whether the Constitution and laws of the state, the ordinances and orders of the local government, and the requirements of the state auditor have been properly complied with; and into the methods and accuracy of the accounts and reports.

6. A report of such examination shall be made and filed in the office of state auditor, and one copy shall be transmitted to the local government. A copy of any report containing findings of noncompliance with state law shall be transmitted to the attorney general. If any such report discloses malfeasance, misfeasance, or nonfeasance in office on the part of any public officer or employee, within thirty days from the receipt of his or her copy of the report, the attorney general shall institute, in the proper county, such legal action as is proper in the premises by civil process and prosecute the same to final determination to carry into effect the findings of the examination.

7. It shall be unlawful for any local government or the responsible head thereof, to make a settlement or compromise of any claim arising out of such malfeasance, misfeasance, or nonfeasance, or any action commenced therefor, or for any court to enter upon any compromise or settlement of such action, without the written approval and consent of the attorney general and the state auditor.

\[ [2009 c 564 § 927](https://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/2009-10/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/House/1244-S.SL.pdf?cite=2009%20c%20564%20§%20927); [1995 c 301 § 15](https://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/1995-96/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/House/1889.SL.pdf?cite=1995%20c%20301%20§%2015); [1991 sp.s. c 30 § 26](https://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/1991-92/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/House/1907-S.SL.pdf?cite=1991%20sp.s.%20c%2030%20§%2026); [1979 c 71 § 1](https://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1979c71.pdf?cite=1979%20c%2071%20§%201); [1965 c 8 § 43.09.260](https://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1965c8.pdf?cite=1965%20c%208%20§%2043.09.260); [1909 c 76 § 8](https://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1909c76.pdf?cite=1909%20c%2076%20§%208); RRS § 9958; \]

## 43.09.270 - Local government accounting—Expense of audit, what constitutes.
The expense of auditing local governments and those expenses directly related to prescribing accounting systems, training, maintenance of working capital including reserves for late and uncollectible accounts and necessary adjustments to billings, and field audit supervision, shall be considered expenses of auditing public accounts within the meaning of RCW 43.09.280 and 43.09.282, and shall be prorated for that purpose equally among all entities directly affected by such service.

\[ [1995 c 301 § 17](https://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/1995-96/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/House/1889.SL.pdf?cite=1995%20c%20301%20§%2017); [1993 c 315 § 1](https://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/1993-94/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/House/1521.SL.pdf?cite=1993%20c%20315%20§%201); [1991 sp.s. c 16 § 920](https://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/1991-92/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/House/1330-S.SL.pdf?cite=1991%20sp.s.%20c%2016%20§%20920); [1982 c 206 § 1](https://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1982c206.pdf?cite=1982%20c%20206%20§%201); [1965 c 8 § 43.09.270](https://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1965c8.pdf?cite=1965%20c%208%20§%2043.09.270); [1963 c 209 § 4](https://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1963c209.pdf?cite=1963%20c%20209%20§%204); [1911 c 30 § 1](https://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1911c30.pdf?cite=1911%20c%2030%20§%201); [1909 c 76 § 10](https://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1909c76.pdf?cite=1909%20c%2076%20§%2010); RRS § 9960; \]

## 43.09.280 - Local government accounting—Expense of examination.
The expense of auditing public accounts shall be borne by each entity subject to such audit for the auditing of all accounts under its jurisdiction and the state auditor shall certify the expense of such audit to the fiscal or warrant-issuing officer of such entity, who shall immediately make payment to the state auditor. If the expense as certified is not paid by any local government within thirty days from the date of certification, the state auditor may certify the expense to the auditor of the county in which the local government is situated, who shall promptly issue his or her warrant on the county treasurer payable out of the current expense fund of the county, which fund, except as to auditing the financial affairs and making inspection and examination of the county, shall be reimbursed by the county auditor or chief financial officer designated in a charter county out of the money due the local government at the next monthly settlement of the collection of taxes and shall be transferred to the current expense fund.

\[ [2009 c 337 § 14](https://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/2009-10/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/House/1583-S.SL.pdf?cite=2009%20c%20337%20§%2014); [1995 c 301 § 18](https://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/1995-96/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/House/1889.SL.pdf?cite=1995%20c%20301%20§%2018); [1979 c 71 § 2](https://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1979c71.pdf?cite=1979%20c%2071%20§%202); [1965 c 8 § 43.09.280](https://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1965c8.pdf?cite=1965%20c%208%20§%2043.09.280); [1963 c 209 § 5](https://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1963c209.pdf?cite=1963%20c%20209%20§%205); [1911 c 30 § 1](https://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1911c30.pdf?cite=1911%20c%2030%20§%201); [1909 c 76 § 11](https://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1909c76.pdf?cite=1909%20c%2076%20§%2011); RRS § 9961; \]

## 43.09.2801 - Local government accounting—Expense of audit—Additional charge.
1. From July 1, 1992, to June 30, 1995, the state auditor shall charge an entity subject to an audit an additional ten cents per hour billed under RCW 43.09.270 and 43.09.280, to be deposited in the local government administrative hearings account.

2. After June 30, 1995, the state auditor shall base the amount to be collected and deposited into the local government administrative hearings account on the funds remaining in the account on June 30, 1995, and the anticipated caseload for the future.

3. The state auditor may exempt a local government that certifies that it is in compliance with RCW 42.41.050 from a charge added under subsection (1) or (2) of this section.

\[ [1995 c 301 § 19](https://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/1995-96/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/House/1889.SL.pdf?cite=1995%20c%20301%20§%2019); [1992 c 44 § 11](https://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/1991-92/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/Senate/6321-S.SL.pdf?cite=1992%20c%2044%20§%2011); \]

## 43.09.281 - Appeal procedure to be adopted—Inclusion of number and disposition of appeals in annual report.
The state auditor shall adopt appropriate rules pursuant to chapter 34.05 RCW, the administrative procedure act, to provide a procedure whereby a *taxing district may appeal charges levied under RCW 43.09.280. Such procedure shall provide for an administrative review process and an external review process which shall be advisory to the state auditor's office. The number of appeals and their disposition shall be included in the auditor's annual report.

\[ [1982 c 206 § 3](https://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1982c206.pdf?cite=1982%20c%20206%20§%203); \]

## 43.09.282 - Local government accounting—Municipal revolving account—Records of auditing costs.
For the purposes of centralized funding, accounting, and distribution of the costs of the audits performed on local governments by the state auditor, there is hereby created an account entitled the municipal revolving account. The state treasurer shall be custodian of the account. All moneys received by the state auditor or by any officer or employee thereof shall be deposited with the state treasurer and credited to the municipal revolving account. Only the state auditor or the auditor's designee may authorize expenditures from the account. No appropriation is required for expenditures. The state auditor shall keep such records as are necessary to detail the auditing costs attributable to the various types of local governments. During the 2009-2011 fiscal biennium, the state auditor shall reduce the municipal revolving account charges for financial audits performed on local governments by five percent.

\[ [2009 c 564 § 928](https://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/2009-10/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/House/1244-S.SL.pdf?cite=2009%20c%20564%20§%20928); [2008 c 328 § 6007](https://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/2007-08/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/House/2765-S.SL.pdf?cite=2008%20c%20328%20§%206007); [1995 c 301 § 20](https://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/1995-96/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/House/1889.SL.pdf?cite=1995%20c%20301%20§%2020); [1982 c 206 § 2](https://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1982c206.pdf?cite=1982%20c%20206%20§%202); [1965 c 8 § 43.09.282](https://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1965c8.pdf?cite=1965%20c%208%20§%2043.09.282); [1963 c 209 § 6](https://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1963c209.pdf?cite=1963%20c%20209%20§%206); \]

## 43.09.285 - Joint operations by municipal corporations or political subdivisions—Deposit and control of funds.
Whenever by law, two or more municipal corporations or political subdivisions of the state are permitted by law to engage in a joint operation, the funds of such joint operation shall be deposited in the public treasury of the municipal corporation or political subdivision embracing the largest population or the public treasury of any other as so agreed upon by the parties; and such deposit shall be subject to the same audit and fiscal controls as the public treasury where the funds are so deposited: PROVIDED, That whenever the laws applicable to any particular joint operation specifically state a contrary rule for deposits, the specific rule shall apply in lieu of the provisions of this section: PROVIDED, FURTHER, That nothing contained herein shall be construed as limiting the power or authority of the disbursing officer of such joint operation from making disbursements in accordance with the provisions of any contract or agreement entered into between the parties to the joint operation.

\[ [1967 c 41 § 1](https://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1967c41.pdf?cite=1967%20c%2041%20§%201); \]

## 43.09.2851 - Repayment of amounts charged to another fund within same political subdivision to be credited to original fund or appropriation—Expenditure.
Except as otherwise provided by law, amounts charged by a county, city, or other municipal or quasi municipal corporation for providing services or furnishing materials to or for another fund within the same county, city, or other municipal or quasi municipal corporation pursuant to RCW 43.09.210 or other law shall be repaid and credited to the fund or appropriation against which the expenditure originally was charged. Amounts representing a return of expenditures from an appropriation shall be considered as returned loans of services or goods, supplies, or other materials furnished and may be expended as part of the original appropriation to which they belong, without further or additional appropriation.

Except as otherwise provided by law, this section shall not apply to the furnishing of materials or services by one fund to another when other funds have been provided specifically for that purpose pursuant to law.

\[ [1981 c 39 § 1](https://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1981c39.pdf?cite=1981%20c%2039%20§%201); \]

## 43.09.2853 - Municipal corporations authorized to establish line of credit for payment of warrants—Interest.
Any municipal corporation is authorized to establish a line of credit with any *qualified public depositary to be drawn upon for cashing its warrants, to delegate to a fiscal officer authority to determine the amount of credit extended, and to pay interest and other finance or service charges. The interest rate may be a fixed rate set periodically or a fluctuating rate determined by agreement of the parties. If any warrant of a municipal corporation is presented and not paid for lack of funds, the interest rate set on unpaid warrants shall apply. Nothing in this section affects the priority for payment of warrants established by law.

\[ [1981 c 156 § 37](https://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1981c156.pdf?cite=1981%20c%20156%20§%2037); \]

## 43.09.2855 - Local governments—Use of credit cards.
1. Local governments, including counties, cities, towns, special purpose districts, municipal and quasi-municipal corporations, and political subdivisions, are authorized to use credit cards for official government purchases and acquisitions.

2. A local government may contract for issuance of the credit cards.

3. The legislative body shall adopt a system for:

   a. The distribution of the credit cards;

   b. The authorization and control of the use of credit card funds;

   c. The credit limits available on the credit cards;

   d. Payment of the bills; and

   e. Any other rule necessary to implement or administer the system under this section.

4. As used in this section, "credit card" means a card or device issued under an arrangement pursuant to which the issuer gives to a cardholder the privilege of obtaining credit from the issuer.

5. Any credit card system adopted under this section is subject to examination by the state auditor's office pursuant to chapter 43.09 RCW.

6. Cash advances on credit cards are prohibited.

\[ [1995 c 30 § 2](https://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/1995-96/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/Senate/5370-S.SL.pdf?cite=1995%20c%2030%20§%202); \]

## 43.09.2856 - School district audits—School district compliance with RCW  28A.150.276 and  28A.505.240—Report of findings.
1. Beginning with the 2019-20 school year, to ensure that school district local revenues are used solely for purposes of enriching the state's statutory program of basic education, the state auditor's regular financial audits of school districts must include a review of the expenditure of school district local revenues for compliance with RCW 28A.150.276, including the spending plan approved by the superintendent of public instruction under RCW 28A.505.240 and its implementation, and any supplemental contracts entered into under RCW 28A.400.200. The audit must also include a review of the expenditure schedule and supporting documentation required by RCW 28A.320.330(1)(c).

2. If an audit under subsection (1) of this section results in findings that a school district has failed to comply with these requirements, then within ninety days of completing the audit the auditor must report the findings to the superintendent of public instruction, the office of financial management, and the education and operating budget committees of the legislature. If the superintendent of public instruction receives a report of findings from the state auditor that an expenditure of a school district is out of compliance with the requirements of RCW 28A.150.276, and the finding is not resolved in the subsequent audit, the maximum taxes levied for collection by the school district under RCW 84.52.0531 in the following calendar year shall be reduced by the expenditure amount identified by the state auditor.

3. The use of the state allocation provided for professional learning under RCW 28A.150.415 must be audited as part of the regular financial audits of school districts by the state auditor's office to ensure compliance with the limitations and conditions of RCW 28A.150.415.

\[ [2019 c 410 § 4](https://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/2019-20/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/Senate/5313-S.SL.pdf?cite=2019%20c%20410%20§%204); 2019 c 387 § 5; [2018 c 266 § 406](https://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/2017-18/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/Senate/6362-S2.SL.pdf?cite=2018%20c%20266%20§%20406); [2017 3rd sp.s. c 13 § 503](https://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/2017-18/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/House/2242.SL.pdf?cite=2017%203rd%20sp.s.%20c%2013%20§%20503); \]

## 43.09.290 - Post-audit of state agencies—Definitions.
For the purposes of RCW 43.09.290 through 43.09.340 and 43.09.410 through 43.09.418, post-audit means an audit of the books, records, funds, accounts, and financial transactions of a state agency for a complete fiscal period; pre-audit means all other audits and examinations; state agency means elective officers and offices, and every other office, officer, department, board, council, committee, commission, or authority of the state government now existing or hereafter created, supported, wholly or in part, by appropriations from the state treasury or funds under its control, or by the levy, assessment, collection, or receipt of fines, penalties, fees, licenses, sales of commodities, service charges, rentals, grants-in-aid, or other income provided by law, and all state educational, penal, reformatory, charitable, eleemosynary, or other institutions, supported, wholly or in part, by appropriations from the state treasury or funds under its control, but not including a comprehensive cancer center participating in a collaborative arrangement as defined in RCW 28B.10.930 that is operated in conformance with RCW 28B.10.930.

\[ [2022 c 71 § 7](https://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/2021-22/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/House/1744.SL.pdf?cite=2022%20c%2071%20§%207); [1995 c 301 § 21](https://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/1995-96/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/House/1889.SL.pdf?cite=1995%20c%20301%20§%2021); [1981 c 336 § 6](https://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1981c336.pdf?cite=1981%20c%20336%20§%206); [1965 c 8 § 43.09.290](https://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1965c8.pdf?cite=1965%20c%208%20§%2043.09.290); [1941 c 196 § 1](https://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1941c196.pdf?cite=1941%20c%20196%20§%201); Rem. Supp. 1941 § 11018-1; \]

## 43.09.310 - Audit of statewide combined financial statements—Post-audits of state agencies—Periodic audits—Reports—Filing.
1. Except as provided in subsection (2) of this section, the state auditor shall annually audit the statewide combined financial statements prepared by the office of financial management and make post-audits of state agencies. Post-audits of state agencies shall be made at such periodic intervals as is determined by the state auditor. Audits of combined financial statements shall include determinations as to the validity and accuracy of accounting methods, procedures and standards utilized in their preparation, as well as the accuracy of the financial statements themselves. A report shall be made of each such audit and post-audit upon completion thereof, and one copy shall be transmitted to the governor, one to the director of financial management, one to the state agency audited, one to the joint legislative audit and review committee, one each to the standing committees on ways and means of the house and senate, one to the chief clerk of the house, one to the secretary of the senate, and at least one shall be kept on file in the office of the state auditor. A copy of any report containing findings of noncompliance with state law shall be transmitted to the attorney general and shall be subject to the process provided in RCW 43.09.312.

2. Audits of the department of labor and industries must be coordinated with the audits required under RCW 51.44.115 to avoid duplication of audits.

\[ [2017 c 66 § 1](https://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/2017-18/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/Senate/5372-S.SL.pdf?cite=2017%20c%2066%20§%201); [2005 c 387 § 2](https://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/2005-06/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/House/1856-S.SL.pdf?cite=2005%20c%20387%20§%202); [1996 c 288 § 35](https://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/1995-96/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/House/2222-S2.SL.pdf?cite=1996%20c%20288%20§%2035); [1995 c 301 § 22](https://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/1995-96/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/House/1889.SL.pdf?cite=1995%20c%20301%20§%2022); [1981 c 217 § 1](https://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1981c217.pdf?cite=1981%20c%20217%20§%201); [1979 c 151 § 92](https://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1979c151.pdf?cite=1979%20c%20151%20§%2092); 1975-'76 2nd ex.s. c 17 § 1; [1975 1st ex.s. c 293 § 1](https://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1975ex1c293.pdf?cite=1975%201st%20ex.s.%20c%20293%20§%201); [1975 1st ex.s. c 193 § 1](https://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1975ex1c193.pdf?cite=1975%201st%20ex.s.%20c%20193%20§%201); [1971 ex.s. c 170 § 2](https://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1971ex1c170.pdf?cite=1971%20ex.s.%20c%20170%20§%202); [1965 c 8 § 43.09.310](https://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1965c8.pdf?cite=1965%20c%208%20§%2043.09.310); prior:  1947 c 114 § 1; [1941 c 196 § 3](https://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1941c196.pdf?cite=1941%20c%20196%20§%203); Rem. Supp. 1947 § 11018-3; \]

## 43.09.312 - Post-audits of state agencies under RCW  43.09.310—Noncompliance—Remediation—Referral to attorney general.
1. Within thirty days of receipt of an audit under RCW 43.09.310 containing findings of noncompliance with state law, the subject state agency shall submit a response and a plan for remediation to the office of financial management. Within sixty days of receipt of an audit under RCW 43.09.310 containing findings of noncompliance with state law, the office of financial management shall submit the subject state agency's response and a plan for remediation to the governor, the state auditor, the joint legislative audit and review committee, and the relevant fiscal and policy committees of the senate and house of representatives.

2. If, at the next succeeding audit of the subject state agency, the state auditor determines that the subject state agency has failed to make substantial progress in remediating the noncompliance with state law, the state auditor shall notify the entities specified in subsection (1) of this section.

3. Upon receipt of a notification under subsection (2) of this section, a fiscal or policy committee of the senate or house of representatives may refer the matter to the senate committee on facilities and operations or the executive rules committee of the house of representatives, which committee may refer the matter to the attorney general for appropriate legal action under RCW 43.09.330.

\[ [2017 c 66 § 2](https://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/2017-18/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/Senate/5372-S.SL.pdf?cite=2017%20c%2066%20§%202); \]

## 43.09.330 - Audit disclosing malfeasance or nonfeasance—Action by attorney general.
If any audit of a state agency discloses malfeasance, misfeasance, or nonfeasance in office on the part of any public officer or employee, within thirty days from the receipt of his or her copy of the report, the attorney general shall institute and prosecute in the proper county, appropriate legal action to carry into effect the findings of such post-audit. It shall be unlawful for any state agency or the responsible head thereof, to make a settlement or compromise of any claim arising out of such malfeasance, misfeasance, or nonfeasance, or any action commenced therefor, or for any court to enter upon any compromise or settlement of such action without the written approval and consent of the attorney general and the state auditor.

\[ [1995 c 301 § 23](https://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/1995-96/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/House/1889.SL.pdf?cite=1995%20c%20301%20§%2023); [1965 c 8 § 43.09.330](https://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1965c8.pdf?cite=1965%20c%208%20§%2043.09.330); [1941 c 196 § 5](https://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1941c196.pdf?cite=1941%20c%20196%20§%205); Rem. Supp. 1941 § 11018-5; \]

## 43.09.340 - Post-audit of books of state auditor.
The governor shall, at least every two years, provide for a post-audit of the books, accounts, and records of the state auditor, and the funds under his or her control, to be made either by independent qualified public accountants or the director of financial management, as he or she may determine. The expense of making such audit shall be paid from appropriations made therefor from the general fund.

\[ [1995 c 301 § 24](https://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/1995-96/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/House/1889.SL.pdf?cite=1995%20c%20301%20§%2024); [1979 c 151 § 93](https://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1979c151.pdf?cite=1979%20c%20151%20§%2093); [1965 c 8 § 43.09.340](https://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1965c8.pdf?cite=1965%20c%208%20§%2043.09.340); [1947 c 114 § 2](https://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1947c114.pdf?cite=1947%20c%20114%20§%202); [1941 c 196 § 6](https://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1941c196.pdf?cite=1941%20c%20196%20§%206); Rem. Supp. 1947 § 11018-6; \]

## 43.09.410 - Auditing services revolving account—Created—Purpose.
An auditing services revolving account is hereby created in the state treasury for the purpose of a centralized funding, accounting, and distribution of the actual costs of the audits provided to state agencies by the state auditor and audits of the state employee whistleblower program under RCW 42.40.110.

\[ [1999 c 361 § 9](https://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/1999-00/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/House/2005-S.SL.pdf?cite=1999%20c%20361%20§%209); [1995 c 301 § 25](https://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/1995-96/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/House/1889.SL.pdf?cite=1995%20c%20301%20§%2025); [1981 c 336 § 1](https://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1981c336.pdf?cite=1981%20c%20336%20§%201); \]

## 43.09.412 - Auditing services revolving account—Transfers and payments into account—Allotments to state auditor.
The amounts to be disbursed from the auditing services revolving account shall be paid from funds appropriated to any and all state agencies for auditing services or administrative expenses. State agencies operating in whole or in part from nonappropriated funds shall pay into the auditing services revolving account such funds as will fully reimburse funds appropriated to the state auditor for auditing services provided.

The director of financial management shall allot all such funds to the state auditor for the operation of his or her office, pursuant to appropriation, in the same manner as appropriated funds are allocated to other state agencies headed by elected officers under chapter 43.88 RCW.

\[ [1995 c 301 § 26](https://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/1995-96/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/House/1889.SL.pdf?cite=1995%20c%20301%20§%2026); [1987 c 165 § 1](https://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1987c165.pdf?cite=1987%20c%20165%20§%201); [1981 c 336 § 2](https://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1981c336.pdf?cite=1981%20c%20336%20§%202); \]

## 43.09.414 - Auditing services revolving account—Disbursements.
Disbursements from the auditing services revolving account shall be made pursuant to vouchers executed by the state auditor or his or her designee in accordance with RCW 43.09.412.

\[ [1995 c 301 § 27](https://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/1995-96/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/House/1889.SL.pdf?cite=1995%20c%20301%20§%2027); [1981 c 336 § 3](https://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1981c336.pdf?cite=1981%20c%20336%20§%203); \]

## 43.09.416 - Auditing services revolving account—Allocation of costs to funds, accounts, and agencies—Billing rate.
The state auditor shall keep such records as are necessary to facilitate proper allocation of costs to funds and accounts and state agencies served and the director of financial management shall prescribe appropriate accounting procedures to accurately allocate costs to funds and accounts and state agencies served. The billing rate shall be established based on costs incurred in the prior biennium and anticipated costs in the new biennium. Those expenses related to training, maintenance of working capital including reserves for late and uncollectible accounts, and necessary adjustments to billings, shall be considered as expenses of auditing public accounts. Working capital shall not exceed five percent of the auditing services revolving account appropriation.

\[ [1995 c 301 § 28](https://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/1995-96/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/House/1889.SL.pdf?cite=1995%20c%20301%20§%2028); [1987 c 165 § 2](https://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1987c165.pdf?cite=1987%20c%20165%20§%202); [1981 c 336 § 4](https://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1981c336.pdf?cite=1981%20c%20336%20§%204); \]

## 43.09.418 - Auditing services revolving account—Direct payments from state agencies.
In cases where there are unanticipated demands for auditing services or where there are insufficient funds on hand or available for payment through the auditing services revolving account or in other cases of necessity, the state auditor may request payment for auditing services directly from state agencies for whom the services are performed to the extent that revenues or other funds are available. Upon approval by the director of financial management the state agency shall make the requested payment. The payment may be made on either an advance or reimbursable basis as approved by the director of financial management.

\[ [1995 c 301 § 29](https://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/1995-96/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/House/1889.SL.pdf?cite=1995%20c%20301%20§%2029); [1981 c 336 § 5](https://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1981c336.pdf?cite=1981%20c%20336%20§%205); \]

## 43.09.420 - Audit of revolving, local, and other funds and accounts.
As part of the routine audits of state agencies, the state auditor shall audit all revolving funds, local funds, and other state funds and state accounts that are not managed by or in the care of the state treasurer and that are under the control of state agencies, including but not limited to state departments, boards, and commissions. In conducting the audits of these funds and accounts, the auditor shall examine revenues and expenditures or assets and liabilities, accounting methods and procedures, and recordkeeping practices.

\[ [2022 c 148 § 3](https://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/2021-22/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/Senate/5002.SL.pdf?cite=2022%20c%20148%20§%203); [1993 c 216 § 1](https://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/1993-94/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/Senate/5606-S.SL.pdf?cite=1993%20c%20216%20§%201); \]

## 43.09.430 - Performance audits—Definition.
For purposes of this chapter, "preliminary performance audit report" means a written document prepared after the completion of a performance audit to be submitted for comment before the final performance audit report. The preliminary performance audit report must contain the audit findings and any proposed recommendations to improve the efficiency, effectiveness, or accountability of the state agency being audited.

\[ [2022 c 148 § 4](https://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/2021-22/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/Senate/5002.SL.pdf?cite=2022%20c%20148%20§%204); [2005 c 385 § 2](https://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/2005-06/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/House/1064-S.SL.pdf?cite=2005%20c%20385%20§%202); \]

## 43.09.440 - Performance audits—Comments.
The state auditor must solicit comments on preliminary performance audit reports from the audited state agency, the office of the governor, and the office of financial management. Comments must be received within thirty days after receipt of the preliminary performance audit report unless a different time period is approved by the state auditor. All comments shall be incorporated into the final performance audit report. The final performance audit report shall include the objectives, scope, and methodology; the audit results, including findings and recommendations; conclusions; and identification of best practices.

\[ [2022 c 148 § 5](https://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/2021-22/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/Senate/5002.SL.pdf?cite=2022%20c%20148%20§%205); [2012 c 229 § 817](https://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/2011-12/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/House/2483-S2.SL.pdf?cite=2012%20c%20229%20§%20817); [2005 c 385 § 5](https://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/2005-06/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/House/1064-S.SL.pdf?cite=2005%20c%20385%20§%205); \]

## 43.09.455 - Performance audits—Follow-up and corrective action—Progress reports.
The audited agency is responsible for follow-up and corrective action on all performance audit findings and recommendations. The audited agency's plan for addressing each audit finding and recommendation shall be included in the final audit report. The plan shall provide the name of the contact person responsible for each action, the action planned, and the anticipated completion date. If the audited agency does not agree with the audit findings and recommendations or believes action is not required, then the action plan shall include an explanation and specific reasons.

For agencies under the authority of the governor, the governor may require periodic progress reports from the audited agency until all resolution has occurred.

For agencies under the authority of an elected official other than the governor, the appropriate elected official may require periodic reports of the action taken by the audited agency until all resolution has occurred.

\[ [2022 c 148 § 6](https://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/2021-22/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/Senate/5002.SL.pdf?cite=2022%20c%20148%20§%206); [2005 c 385 § 9](https://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/2005-06/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/House/1064-S.SL.pdf?cite=2005%20c%20385%20§%209); \]

## 43.09.465 - Comprehensive performance audit of state printing services.
By November 1, 2016, building on the findings of the 2011 audit, the state auditor shall conduct a comprehensive performance audit of state printing services in accordance with RCW 43.09.470. Following the audit in 2016, the state auditor shall conduct follow-up audits as deemed necessary to ensure effective implementation of chapter 43, Laws of 2011 1st sp. sess.

\[ [2011 1st sp.s. c 43 § 310](https://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/2011-12/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/Senate/5931-S.SL.pdf?cite=2011%201st%20sp.s.%20c%2043%20§%20310); \]

## 43.09.466 - Comprehensive performance audit of statewide sexual assault tracking system. (Expires July 1, 2023.)
1. After January 1, 2022, the auditor shall conduct a comprehensive performance audit of the statewide sexual assault tracking system under RCW 43.43.545 and the operations of the Washington state patrol crime laboratory with respect to processing sexual assault kits. In addition to other measures established by the auditor, the performance audit shall assess:

   a. Whether the Washington state patrol is operating the statewide sexual assault kit tracking system in accordance with RCW 43.43.545 and best practices; and

   b. Whether the Washington state patrol crime laboratory has taken actions consistent with best practices, chapter 70.125 RCW, and related state budgetary requirements to address testing backlogs and otherwise improve efficiency and efficacy of sexual assault kit testing.

2. The auditor shall complete the audit and publish a report with its findings no later than December 31, 2022.

3. This section expires July 1, 2023.

\[ [2019 c 93 § 3](https://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/2019-20/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/House/1166-S2.SL.pdf?cite=2019%20c%2093%20§%203); \]

## 43.09.470 - Comprehensive performance audits—Scope—Reports.
In addition to audits authorized under RCW 43.88.160, the state auditor shall conduct independent, comprehensive performance audits of state government and each of its agencies, accounts, and programs; local governments and each of their agencies, accounts, and programs; state and local education governmental entities and each of their agencies, accounts, and programs; state and local transportation governmental entities and each of their agencies, accounts, and programs; and other governmental entities, agencies, accounts, and programs. The term "government" means an agency, department, office, officer, board, commission, bureau, division, institution, or institution of higher education. This includes individual agencies and programs, as well as those programs and activities that cross agency lines. "Government" includes all elective and nonelective offices in the executive branch and includes the judicial and legislative branches. The state auditor shall review and analyze the economy, efficiency, and effectiveness of the policies, management, fiscal affairs, and operations of state and local governments, agencies, programs, and accounts. These performance audits shall be conducted in accordance with the United States general accounting office government auditing standards. The scope for each performance audit shall not be limited and shall include nine specific elements: (1) Identification of cost savings; (2) identification of services that can be reduced or eliminated; (3) identification of programs or services that can be transferred to the private sector; (4) analysis of gaps or overlaps in programs or services and recommendations to correct gaps or overlaps; (5) feasibility of pooling information technology systems within the department; (6) analysis of the roles and functions of the department, and recommendations to change or eliminate departmental roles or functions; (7) recommendations for statutory or regulatory changes that may be necessary for the department to properly carry out its functions; (8) analysis of departmental performance data, performance measures, and self-assessment systems; and (9) identification of best practices. The state auditor may contract out any performance audits. For counties and cities, the audit may be conducted as part of audits otherwise required by state law. Each audit report shall be submitted to the corresponding legislative body or legislative bodies and made available to the public on or before thirty days after the completion of each audit or each follow-up audit. On or before thirty days after the performance audit is made public, the corresponding legislative body or legislative bodies shall hold at least one public hearing to consider the findings of the audit and shall receive comments from the public. The state auditor is authorized to issue subpoenas to governmental entities for required documents, memos, and budgets to conduct the performance audits. The state auditor may, at any time, conduct a performance audit to determine not only the efficiency, but also the effectiveness, of any government agency, account, or program. No legislative body, officeholder, or employee may impede or restrict the authority or the actions of the state auditor to conduct independent, comprehensive performance audits. To the greatest extent possible, the state auditor shall instruct and advise the appropriate governmental body on a step-by-step remedy to whatever ineffectiveness and inefficiency is discovered in the audited entity. For performance audits of state government and its agencies, programs, and accounts, the legislature must consider the state auditor reports in connection with the legislative appropriations process. An annual report will be submitted by the joint legislative audit and review committee by July 1st of each year detailing the status of the legislative implementation of the state auditor's recommendations. Justification must be provided for recommendations not implemented. Details of other corrective action must be provided as well. For performance audits of local governments and their agencies, programs, and accounts, the corresponding legislative body must consider the state auditor reports in connection with its spending practices. An annual report will be submitted by the legislative body by July 1st of each year detailing the status of the legislative implementation of the state auditor's recommendations. Justification must be provided for recommendations not implemented. Details of other corrective action must be provided as well. The people encourage the state auditor to aggressively pursue the largest, costliest governmental entities first but to pursue all governmental entities in due course. Follow-up performance audits on any state and local government, agency, account, and program may be conducted when determined necessary by the state auditor. Revenues from the performance audits of government account, created in RCW 43.09.475, shall be used for the cost of the audits.

\[ 2006 c 1 § 2 (Initiative Measure No. 900, approved November 8, 2005); \]

## 43.09.471 - Short title—Effective date—2006 c 1 (Initiative Measure No. 900).
This act shall be called the performance audits of government act and takes effect December 8, 2005.

\[ 2006 c 1 § 10 (Initiative Measure No. 900, approved November 8, 2005); \]

## 43.09.475 - Performance audits of government account.
The performance audits of government account is hereby created in the custody of the state treasurer. Revenue identified in RCW 82.08.020(5) and 82.12.0201 shall be deposited in the account. Money in the account shall be used to fund the performance audits and follow-up performance audits under RCW 43.09.470 and shall be expended by the state auditor in accordance with chapter 1, Laws of 2006. Only the state auditor or the state auditor's designee may authorize expenditures from the account. The account is subject to allotment procedures under chapter 43.88 RCW, but an appropriation is not required for expenditures. The performance audits of government account may be appropriated for the joint legislative audit and review committee, the legislative evaluation and accountability program committee, and for the office of financial management's performance audit and compliance audit activities. During the 2019-2021 and 2021-2023 fiscal biennia, the performance audits of government account may be appropriated for the superintendent of public instruction, the department of fish and wildlife, and audits of school districts. In addition, during the 2019-2021 and 2021-2023 fiscal biennia the account may be used to fund the office of financial management's contract for the compliance audit of the state auditor and audit activities at the department of revenue.

\[ [2022 c 157 § 14](https://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/2021-22/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/Senate/5616-S2.SL.pdf?cite=2022%20c%20157%20§%2014); [2021 c 334 § 970](https://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/2021-22/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/Senate/5092-S.SL.pdf?cite=2021%20c%20334%20§%20970); [2019 c 415 § 963](https://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/2019-20/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/House/1109-S.SL.pdf?cite=2019%20c%20415%20§%20963); [2017 3rd sp.s. c 1 § 967](https://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/2017-18/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/Senate/5883-S.SL.pdf?cite=2017%203rd%20sp.s.%20c%201%20§%20967); [2016 sp.s. c 36 § 925](https://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/2015-16/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/House/2376-S.SL.pdf?cite=2016%20sp.s.%20c%2036%20§%20925); [2015 3rd sp.s. c 4 § 954](https://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/2015-16/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/Senate/6052-S.SL.pdf?cite=2015%203rd%20sp.s.%20c%204%20§%20954); [2013 2nd sp.s. c 4 § 974](https://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/2013-14/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/Senate/5034-S.SL.pdf?cite=2013%202nd%20sp.s.%20c%204%20§%20974); [2011 1st sp.s. c 50 § 942](https://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/2011-12/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/House/1087-S.SL.pdf?cite=2011%201st%20sp.s.%20c%2050%20§%20942); [2009 c 564 § 929](https://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/2009-10/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/House/1244-S.SL.pdf?cite=2009%20c%20564%20§%20929); 2006 c 1 § 5 (Initiative Measure No. 900, approved November 8, 2005); \]

## 43.09.480 - Long-term services and supports trust program—Audit—Report.
By December 1, 2032, the state auditor must conduct a comprehensive evaluation of the long-term services and supports trust program established in chapter 50B.04 RCW and deliver a report, including a conclusion and recommendations for improvement to the legislature regarding:

1. Program operations, including the performance of the long-term services and supports trust commission established in RCW 50B.04.030;

2. Program financial status, including solvency, the value of the benefit provided, and the financial balance of program benefits to costs;

3. The overall efficacy of the program, based on the established goals under chapter 363, Laws of 2019 including, but not limited to:

   a. Delaying middle class families' need to spend to poverty to receive medicaid-funded long-term care;

   b. Strengthening the state economy through improving workforce participation;

   c. Reducing the caseload and expenditures of the state medicaid program on long-term care; and

   d. Obtaining shared savings through a medicaid demonstration waiver.

\[ [2019 c 363 § 18](https://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/2019-20/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/House/1087-S2.SL.pdf?cite=2019%20c%20363%20§%2018); \]

