# 52.10 - Dissolution.
* [52.10.001 - Actions subject to review by boundary review board.](#5210001---actions-subject-to-review-by-boundary-review-board)
* [52.10.010 - Dissolution—Election method.](#5210010---dissolutionelection-method)
## 52.10.001 - Actions subject to review by boundary review board.
Actions taken under chapter 52.10 RCW may be subject to potential review by a boundary review board under chapter 36.93 RCW.

\[ [1989 c 84 § 45](https://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1989c84.pdf?cite=1989%20c%2084%20§%2045); \]

## 52.10.010 - Dissolution—Election method.
Fire protection districts may be dissolved by a majority vote of the registered electors of the district at an election conducted by the election officials of the county or counties in which the district is located in accordance with the general election laws of the state. The proceedings for dissolution may be initiated by the adoption of a resolution by the board of commissioners of the district calling for the dissolution. The dissolution of the district shall not cancel outstanding obligations of the district or of a local improvement district within the district, and the county legislative authority or authorities of the county or counties in which the district was located may make annual levies against the lands within the district until the obligations of the districts are paid. When the obligations are fully paid, all moneys in district funds and all collections of unpaid district taxes shall be transferred to the expense fund of the county. Where the fire protection district that was dissolved was located in more than one county, the amount of money transferred to the expense fund of each county shall be in direct proportion to the amount of assessed valuation of the fire protection district that was located in each county at the time of its dissolution.

\[ [1989 c 63 § 19](https://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1989c63.pdf?cite=1989%20c%2063%20§%2019); [1984 c 230 § 15](https://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1984c230.pdf?cite=1984%20c%20230%20§%2015); [1939 c 34 § 46](https://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1939c34.pdf?cite=1939%20c%2034%20§%2046); RRS § 5654-146; \]

