# 18.170 - Security guards.
* [18.170.010 - Definitions.](#18170010---definitions)
* [18.170.020 - Exemptions.](#18170020---exemptions)
* [18.170.030 - Security guard license—Requirements.](#18170030---security-guard-licenserequirements)
* [18.170.040 - Armed private security guard license—Requirements.](#18170040---armed-private-security-guard-licenserequirements)
* [18.170.050 - Armed private security guard license authority—Registration of firearms.](#18170050---armed-private-security-guard-license-authorityregistration-of-firearms)
* [18.170.060 - Private security company license—Requirements, restrictions—Qualifying agent—Assignment or transfer of license.](#18170060---private-security-company-licenserequirements-restrictionsqualifying-agentassignment-or-transfer-of-license)
* [18.170.070 - License cards and certificates—Issuance and requirements.](#18170070---license-cards-and-certificatesissuance-and-requirements)
* [18.170.080 - Licensed private security companies—Certificate of insurance required.](#18170080---licensed-private-security-companiescertificate-of-insurance-required)
* [18.170.090 - Temporary registration cards—Requirements—Expiration—Suspension.](#18170090---temporary-registration-cardsrequirementsexpirationsuspension)
* [18.170.105 - Training requirements.](#18170105---training-requirements)
* [18.170.110 - Required notice of certain occurrences.](#18170110---required-notice-of-certain-occurrences)
* [18.170.120 - Out-of-state licensees—Application—Fee—Temporary assignment.](#18170120---out-of-state-licenseesapplicationfeetemporary-assignment)
* [18.170.130 - Investigation of applicants.](#18170130---investigation-of-applicants)
* [18.170.140 - Regulatory provisions exclusive—Authority of the state and political subdivisions.](#18170140---regulatory-provisions-exclusiveauthority-of-the-state-and-political-subdivisions)
* [18.170.150 - Out-of-state private security guards operating across state lines.](#18170150---out-of-state-private-security-guards-operating-across-state-lines)
* [18.170.160 - Licenses required—Use of public law enforcement insignia prohibited—Penalties—Enforcement.](#18170160---licenses-requireduse-of-public-law-enforcement-insignia-prohibitedpenaltiesenforcement)
* [18.170.164 - License suspension—Noncompliance with support order—Reissuance.](#18170164---license-suspensionnoncompliance-with-support-orderreissuance)
* [18.170.165 - Transfer of license.](#18170165---transfer-of-license)
* [18.170.170 - Unprofessional conduct.](#18170170---unprofessional-conduct)
* [18.170.175 - Display of firearms while soliciting clients.](#18170175---display-of-firearms-while-soliciting-clients)
* [18.170.180 - Authority of director.](#18170180---authority-of-director)
* [18.170.210 - Application of administrative procedure act to hearings.](#18170210---application-of-administrative-procedure-act-to-hearings)
* [18.170.220 - Inability to practice by reason of a mental or physical condition—Statement of charges—Hearing—Sanctions—Examinations—Presumed consent.](#18170220---inability-to-practice-by-reason-of-a-mental-or-physical-conditionstatement-of-chargeshearingsanctionsexaminationspresumed-consent)
* [18.170.230 - Unprofessional conduct or inability to practice—Penalties.](#18170230---unprofessional-conduct-or-inability-to-practicepenalties)
* [18.170.280 - Application of administrative procedure act to acts of the director.](#18170280---application-of-administrative-procedure-act-to-acts-of-the-director)
* [18.170.290 - Uniform regulation of business and professions act.](#18170290---uniform-regulation-of-business-and-professions-act)
* [18.170.300 - Reciprocity agreements.](#18170300---reciprocity-agreements)
* [18.170.310 - Military training or experience.](#18170310---military-training-or-experience)
* [18.170.902 - Effective date—1995 c 277.](#18170902---effective-date1995-c-277)
## 18.170.010 - Definitions.
The definitions in this section apply throughout this chapter unless the context clearly requires otherwise.

1. "Armed private security guard" means a private security guard who has a current firearms certificate issued by the commission and is licensed as an armed private security guard under this chapter.

2. "Armored vehicle guard" means a person who transports in an armored vehicle under armed guard, from one place to another place, valuables, jewelry, currency, documents, or any other item that requires secure delivery.

3. "Burglar alarm response runner" means a person employed by a private security company to respond to burglar alarm system signals.

4. "Burglar alarm system" means a device or an assembly of equipment and devices used to detect or signal unauthorized intrusion, movement, or exit at a protected premises, other than in a vehicle, to which police or private security guards are expected to respond.

5. "Chief law enforcement officer" means the elected or appointed police administrator of a municipal, county, or state police or sheriff's department that has full law enforcement powers in its jurisdiction.

6. "Classroom instruction" means training that takes place in a setting where individuals receiving training are assembled together and learn through lectures, study papers, class discussion, textbook study, or other means of organized formal education techniques, such as video, closed circuit, or other forms of electronic means, and as distinguished from individual instruction.

7. "Commission" means the criminal justice training commission established in chapter 43.101 RCW.

8. "Department" means the department of licensing.

9. "Department-certified trainer" means any person who has been approved by the department by receiving a passing score on a department-administered examination, to administer department-provided examinations and attest that training or testing requirements have been met.

10. "Director" means the director of the department of licensing.

11. "Employer" includes any individual, firm, corporation, partnership, association, company, society, manager, contractor, subcontractor, bureau, agency, service, office, or an agent of any of the foregoing that employs or seeks to enter into an arrangement to employ any person as a private security guard.

12. "Firearms certificate" means the certificate issued by the commission.

13. "Individual instruction" means training that takes place either on-the-job or through formal education techniques, such as video, closed circuit, internet, or other forms of electronic means, and as distinguished from classroom instruction.

14. "Licensee" means a person granted a license required by this chapter.

15. "Person" includes any individual, firm, corporation, partnership, association, company, society, manager, contractor, subcontractor, bureau, agency, service, office, or an agent or employee of any of the foregoing.

16. "Primary responsibility" means activity that is fundamental to, and required or expected in, the regular course of employment and is not merely incidental to employment.

17. "Principal corporate officer" means the president, vice president, treasurer, secretary, comptroller, or any other person who performs the same functions for the corporation as performed by these officers.

18. "Private security company" means a person or entity licensed under this chapter and engaged in the business of providing the services of private security guards on a contractual basis.

19. "Private security guard" means an individual who is licensed under this chapter and principally employed as or typically referred to as one of the following:

    a.  Security officer or guard;

    b.  Patrol or merchant patrol service officer or guard;

    c.  Armed escort or bodyguard;

    d.  Armored vehicle guard;

    e.  Burglar alarm response runner; or

    f.  Crowd control officer or guard.

20. "Qualifying agent" means an officer or manager of a corporation who meets the requirements set forth in this chapter for obtaining a license to own or operate a private security company.

21. "Sworn peace officer" means a person who is an employee of the federal government, the state, a political subdivision, agency, or department branch of a municipality, or other unit of local government, and has law enforcement powers.

\[ [2007 c 306 § 1](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/2007-08/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/House/1988-S.SL.pdf?cite=2007%20c%20306%20§%201); [2007 c 154 § 1](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/2007-08/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/Senate/6090.SL.pdf?cite=2007%20c%20154%20§%201); [2004 c 50 § 1](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/2003-04/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/House/2657-S.SL.pdf?cite=2004%20c%2050%20§%201); [1991 c 334 § 1](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/1991-92/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/Senate/5124-S2.SL.pdf?cite=1991%20c%20334%20§%201); \]

## 18.170.020 - Exemptions.
The requirements of this chapter do not apply to:

1. A person who is employed exclusively or regularly by one employer and performs the functions of a private security guard solely in connection with the affairs of that employer, if the employer is not a private security company. However, in accordance with RCW 69.50.382, an employee engaged in marijuana-related transportation or delivery services on behalf of a common carrier must be licensed as an armed private security guard under this chapter in order to be authorized to carry or use a firearm while providing such services;

2. A sworn peace officer while engaged in the performance of the officer's official duties;

3. A sworn peace officer while employed by any person to engage in off-duty employment as a private security guard, but only if the employment is approved by the chief law enforcement officer of the jurisdiction where the employment takes place and the sworn peace officer does not employ, contract with, or broker for profit other persons to assist him or her in performing the duties related to his or her private employer; or

4. [Empty]

    a.  A person performing crowd management or guest services including, but not limited to, a person described as a ticket taker, usher, door attendant, parking attendant, crowd monitor, or event staff who:

        i.  Does not carry a firearm or other dangerous weapon including, but not limited to, a stun gun, taser, pepper mace, or nightstick;

        ii.  Does not wear a uniform or clothing readily identifiable by a member of the public as that worn by a private security officer or law enforcement officer; and

        iii.  Does not have as his or her primary responsibility the detainment of persons or placement of persons under arrest.

    b.  The exemption provided in this subsection applies only when a crowd has assembled for the purpose of attending or taking part in an organized event, including preevent assembly, event operation hours, and postevent departure activities.

\[ [2015 2nd sp.s. c 4 § 504](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/2015-16/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/House/2136-S2.SL.pdf?cite=2015%202nd%20sp.s.%20c%204%20§%20504); [2007 c 154 § 2](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/2007-08/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/Senate/6090.SL.pdf?cite=2007%20c%20154%20§%202); [2006 c 173 § 1](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/2005-06/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/Senate/6257-S.SL.pdf?cite=2006%20c%20173%20§%201); [1991 c 334 § 2](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/1991-92/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/Senate/5124-S2.SL.pdf?cite=1991%20c%20334%20§%202); \]

## 18.170.030 - Security guard license—Requirements.
An applicant must meet the following minimum requirements to obtain a private security guard license:

1. Be at least eighteen years of age;

2. Be a citizen of the United States or a resident alien;

3. Not have been convicted of a crime in any jurisdiction, if the director determines that the applicant's particular crime directly relates to his or her capacity to perform the duties of a private security guard, and the director determines that the license should be withheld to protect the citizens of Washington state. The director shall make her or his determination to withhold a license because of previous convictions notwithstanding the restoration of employment rights act, chapter 9.96A RCW;

4. Be employed by or have an employment offer from a licensed private security company or be licensed as a private security company;

5. Satisfy the training requirements established by the director;

6. Submit a set of fingerprints; however, if an applicant has been issued a license as a private investigator under chapter 18.165 RCW within the last twelve months, the applicant is not required to undergo a separate background check to become licensed under this chapter;

7. Pay the required nonrefundable fee for each application; and

8. Submit a fully completed application that includes proper identification on a form prescribed by the director for each company of employment.

\[ [2012 c 118 § 2](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/2011-12/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/Senate/6098.SL.pdf?cite=2012%20c%20118%20§%202); [1995 c 277 § 1](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/1995-96/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/House/1679-S.SL.pdf?cite=1995%20c%20277%20§%201); [1991 c 334 § 3](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/1991-92/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/Senate/5124-S2.SL.pdf?cite=1991%20c%20334%20§%203); \]

## 18.170.040 - Armed private security guard license—Requirements.
1. An applicant must meet the following minimum requirements to obtain an armed private security guard license:

    a.  Be licensed as a private security guard;

    b.  Be at least twenty-one years of age;

    c.  Have a current firearms certificate issued by the commission; and

    d.  Pay the fee established by the director.

2. An armed private security guard license may take the form of an endorsement to the security guard license if deemed appropriate by the director.

\[ [1991 c 334 § 4](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/1991-92/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/Senate/5124-S2.SL.pdf?cite=1991%20c%20334%20§%204); \]

## 18.170.050 - Armed private security guard license authority—Registration of firearms.
1. An armed private security guard license grants authority to the holder, while in the performance of his or her duties, to carry a firearm with which the holder has met the proficiency requirements established by the commission.

2. All firearms carried by armed private security guards in the performance of their duties must be owned or leased by the employer and, if required by law, must be registered with the proper government agency.

\[ [1991 c 334 § 5](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/1991-92/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/Senate/5124-S2.SL.pdf?cite=1991%20c%20334%20§%205); \]

## 18.170.060 - Private security company license—Requirements, restrictions—Qualifying agent—Assignment or transfer of license.
1. In addition to meeting the minimum requirements to obtain a license as a private security guard, an applicant, or, in the case of a partnership, each partner, or, in the case of a corporation, the qualifying agent must meet the following requirements to obtain a license to own or operate a private security company:

    a.  Possess three years' experience as a manager, supervisor, or administrator in the private security business or a related field approved by the director, or be at least twenty-one years of age and pass an examination determined by the director to measure the person's knowledge and competence in the private security business;

    b.  Meet the insurance requirements of this chapter; and

    c.  Pay any additional fees established by the director.

2. If the qualifying agent upon whom the licensee relies to comply with subsection (1) of this section ceases to perform his or her duties on a regular basis, the licensee must promptly notify the director by certified or registered mail. Within sixty days of sending notification to the director, the licensee must obtain a substitute qualifying agent who meets the requirements of this section. The director may extend the period for obtaining a substitute qualifying agent.

3. A company license issued pursuant to this section may not be assigned or transferred without prior written approval of the director.

4. No license to own or operate a private security guard company may be issued to an applicant if the name of the company portrays the company as a public law enforcement agency, or in association with a public law enforcement agency, or includes the word "police."

\[ [1995 c 277 § 4](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/1995-96/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/House/1679-S.SL.pdf?cite=1995%20c%20277%20§%204); [1991 c 334 § 6](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/1991-92/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/Senate/5124-S2.SL.pdf?cite=1991%20c%20334%20§%206); \]

## 18.170.070 - License cards and certificates—Issuance and requirements.
1. The director shall issue a private security guard license card to each licensed private security guard and an armed private security guard license card to each armed private security guard.

    a.  The license card may not be used as security clearance.

    b.  A private security guard shall carry the license card whenever he or she is performing the duties of a private security guard and shall exhibit the card upon request.

    c.  An armed private security guard shall carry the license card whenever he or she is performing the duties of an armed private security guard and shall exhibit the card upon request.

2. The director shall issue a license certificate to each licensed private security company.

    a.  Within seventy-two hours after receipt of the license certificate, the licensee shall post and display the certificate in a conspicuous place in the principal office of the licensee within the state.

    b.  It is unlawful for any person holding a license certificate to knowingly and willfully post the license certificate upon premises other than those described in the license certificate or to materially alter a license certificate.

    c.  Every advertisement by a licensee that solicits or advertises business shall contain the name of the licensee, the address of record, and the license number as they appear in the records of the director.

    d.  The licensee shall notify the director within thirty days of any change in the licensee's officers or directors or any material change in the information furnished or required to be furnished to the director.

\[ [1995 c 277 § 5](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/1995-96/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/House/1679-S.SL.pdf?cite=1995%20c%20277%20§%205); [1991 c 334 § 7](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/1991-92/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/Senate/5124-S2.SL.pdf?cite=1991%20c%20334%20§%207); \]

## 18.170.080 - Licensed private security companies—Certificate of insurance required.
A licensed private security company shall file and maintain with the director a certificate of insurance as evidence that it has comprehensive general liability coverage of at least twenty-five thousand dollars for bodily or personal injury and twenty-five thousand dollars for property damage.

\[ [1991 c 334 § 8](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/1991-92/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/Senate/5124-S2.SL.pdf?cite=1991%20c%20334%20§%208); \]

## 18.170.090 - Temporary registration cards—Requirements—Expiration—Suspension.
1. A licensed private security company may issue an employee a temporary registration card of the type and form provided by the director, but only after the employee has completed preassignment training and submitted a full and complete application for a private security guard license to the department. The application must be mailed to the department within three business days after issuance of the temporary registration card. The temporary registration card is valid for a maximum period of sixty days and does not authorize a person to carry firearms during the performance of his or her duties as a private security guard. The temporary registration card permits the applicant to perform the duties of a private security guard for the issuing licensee.

2. Upon expiration of a temporary registration card or upon the receipt of a permanent registration card or notification from the department that a permanent license is being withheld from an applicant, the applicant shall surrender his or her temporary registration card to the licensee.

3. The director may suspend the authority to use temporary registration cards for a period of one year for any private security guard company that fails to comply with the provisions of this section. After the suspension period, the director may reinstate the company's use of temporary registration cards after receipt of a written request from the company.

\[ [1995 c 277 § 6](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/1995-96/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/House/1679-S.SL.pdf?cite=1995%20c%20277%20§%206); [1991 c 334 § 9](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/1991-92/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/Senate/5124-S2.SL.pdf?cite=1991%20c%20334%20§%209); \]

## **18.170.105 - Training requirements.**
1. To promote the safety of persons and the security of property, the director shall meet with interested parties to develop lists of suggested preassignment, postassignment, and postassignment refresher training by rule.

2. All security guards licensed on or after July 1, 2005, must complete at least eight hours of preassignment training, comprised of at least four hours of classroom instruction and an additional four hours of classroom instruction or individual instruction, or both. The preassignment training may be waived for any individual who was most recently employed full time as a sworn peace officer not more than five years prior to applying to become licensed as a private security guard and who passes the examination typically administered to applicants at the conclusion of the preassignment training.

3. [Empty]

    a. All security guards licensed on or after July 1, 2005, must complete at least eight hours of initial postassignment training that shall be administered to each security guard. The initial postassignment training must be in the topic areas established by the director and may be classroom instruction or individual instruction, or both. A company may waive the initial postassignment training for security guards already licensed who transfer from another company, if the security guard presents appropriate training records signed by a department-certified trainer from the previous company, or a signed affidavit that the individual has already completed the required initial postassignment training provided by his or her previous company.

    b. Security guards who received their temporary security guard registration card on or before July 22, 2007, must receive their initial postassignment training before June 30, 2008. Security guards who received their temporary security guard registration card after July 22, 2007, must receive their initial postassignment training as specified in (c) and (d) of this subsection.

    c. Security guards licensed between January 1st and June 30th of any calendar year may receive eight hours of initial postassignment training any time between the day following the issuance of a temporary security guard registration card with their company and June 30th of the year following initial issuance of their license by the department.

    d. Security guards initially licensed between July 1st and December 31st of any calendar year may receive eight hours of initial postassignment training at any time between the day following the issuance of a temporary security guard registration card with their company and December 31st of the year following initial issuance of their license by the department.

4. Following completion of the preassignment and postassignment training, at least four total hours of annual refresher training shall be administered to security guards each subsequent year. The subsequent year begins, for refresher training purposes, the day following the last date the security guard is required to receive the eight hours of initial postassignment training. No more than one hour per year of annual refresher training may focus directly on customer service-related skills or topics and the remaining three hours per year of annual refresher training must focus on emergency response concepts, skills, or topics including but not limited to knowledge of site post orders or life safety.

5. **Security guards who receive any of the school safety and security staff classroom training described in section 4(2) of this act may apply the number of completed classroom training hours to meet either the initial postassignment training requirement or the annual refresher training requirement.**

6. Companies must maintain records regarding the training hours completed by each employee. All such records are subject to inspection by the department. The training requirements and test results must be recorded and attested to by a department-certified trainer. Training records must contain a description of the topics covered, the name and signature of the trainer, and the name and signature of the security guard.

## 18.170.110 - Required notice of certain occurrences.
1. A private security company shall notify the director within thirty days after the death or termination of employment of any employee who is a licensed private security guard or armed private security guard by returning the license to the department with the word "terminated" written across the face of the license, the date of termination, and the signature of the principal or the principal's designee of the private security guard company.

2. A private security company shall notify the department within seventy-two hours and the chief law enforcement officer of the county, city, or town in which the private security guard or armed private security guard was last employed immediately upon receipt of information affecting his or her continuing eligibility to hold a license under the provisions of this chapter.

3. A private security guard company shall notify the local law enforcement agency whenever an employee who is an armed private security guard discharges his or her firearm while on duty other than on a supervised firearm range. The notification shall be made within ten business days of the date the firearm is discharged.

\[ [2000 c 171 § 39](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/1999-00/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/House/2400.SL.pdf?cite=2000%20c%20171%20§%2039); [1995 c 277 § 8](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/1995-96/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/House/1679-S.SL.pdf?cite=1995%20c%20277%20§%208); [1991 c 334 § 11](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/1991-92/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/Senate/5124-S2.SL.pdf?cite=1991%20c%20334%20§%2011); \]

## 18.170.120 - Out-of-state licensees—Application—Fee—Temporary assignment.
1. Any person from another state that the director determines has selection, training, and other requirements at least equal to those required by this chapter, and who holds a valid license, registration, identification, or similar card issued by the other state, may apply for a private security guard license card or armed private security guard license card on a form prescribed by the director. Upon receipt of a processing fee to be determined by the director, the director shall issue the individual a private security guard license card or armed private security guard license card.

2. A valid private security guard license, registration, identification, or similar card issued by any other state of the United States is valid in this state for a period of ninety days, but only if the licensee is on temporary assignment as a private security guard for the same employer that employs the licensee in the state in which he or she is a permanent resident.

3. A person from another state on temporary assignment in Washington may not solicit business in this state or represent himself or herself as licensed in this state.

\[ [1995 c 277 § 9](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/1995-96/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/House/1679-S.SL.pdf?cite=1995%20c%20277%20§%209); [1991 c 334 § 12](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/1991-92/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/Senate/5124-S2.SL.pdf?cite=1991%20c%20334%20§%2012); \]

## 18.170.130 - Investigation of applicants.
1. Applications for licenses required under this chapter shall be filed with the director on a form provided by the director. The director may require any information and documentation that reasonably relates to the need to determine whether the applicant meets the criteria.

2. After receipt of an application for a license, the director shall conduct an investigation to determine whether the facts set forth in the application are true and shall request that the Washington state patrol compare the fingerprints submitted with the application to fingerprint records available to the Washington state patrol. The Washington state patrol shall forward the fingerprints of applicants for an armed private security guard license to the federal bureau of investigation for a national criminal history records check. The director may require that fingerprint cards of licensees be periodically reprocessed to identify criminal convictions subsequent to registration.

3. The director shall solicit comments from the chief law enforcement officer of the county and city or town in which the applicant's employer is located on issuance of a permanent private security guard license.

4. A summary of the information acquired under this section, to the extent that it is public information, shall be forwarded by the department to the applicant's employer.

\[ [1995 c 277 § 10](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/1995-96/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/House/1679-S.SL.pdf?cite=1995%20c%20277%20§%2010); [1991 c 334 § 13](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/1991-92/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/Senate/5124-S2.SL.pdf?cite=1991%20c%20334%20§%2013); \]

## 18.170.140 - Regulatory provisions exclusive—Authority of the state and political subdivisions.
1. The provisions of this chapter relating to the licensing for regulatory purposes of private security guards, armed private security guards, and private security companies are exclusive. No governmental subdivision of this state may enact any laws or rules licensing for regulatory purposes such persons, except as provided in subsections (2) and (3) of this section.

2. This section shall not be construed to prevent a political subdivision of this state from levying a business license fee, business and occupation tax, or other tax upon private security companies if such fees or taxes are levied on other types of businesses within its boundaries.

3. This section shall not be construed to prevent this state or a political subdivision of this state from licensing or regulating private security companies with respect to activities performed or offered that are not of a security nature.

\[ [1991 c 334 § 14](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/1991-92/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/Senate/5124-S2.SL.pdf?cite=1991%20c%20334%20§%2014); \]

## 18.170.150 - Out-of-state private security guards operating across state lines.
Private security guards or armed private security guards whose duties require them to operate across state lines may operate in this state if they are properly registered and certified in another state with training, insurance, and certification requirements that the director finds are at least equal to the requirements of this state.

\[ [1991 c 334 § 15](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/1991-92/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/Senate/5124-S2.SL.pdf?cite=1991%20c%20334%20§%2015); \]

## 18.170.160 - Licenses required—Use of public law enforcement insignia prohibited—Penalties—Enforcement.
1. After June 30, 1992, any person who performs the functions and duties of a private security guard in this state without being licensed in accordance with this chapter, or any person presenting or attempting to use as his or her own the license of another, or any person who gives false or forged evidence of any kind to the director in obtaining a license, or any person who falsely impersonates any other licensee, or any person who attempts to use an expired or revoked license, or any person who violates any of the provisions of this chapter is guilty of a gross misdemeanor.

2. After January 1, 1992, a person is guilty of a gross misdemeanor if he or she owns or operates a private security company in this state without first obtaining a private security company license.

3. After June 30, 1992, the owner or qualifying agent of a private security company is guilty of a gross misdemeanor if he or she employs an unlicensed person to perform the duties of a private security guard without issuing the employee a valid temporary registration card if the employee does not have in his or her possession a permanent private security guard license issued by the department. This subsection does not preclude a private security company from requiring applicants to attend preassignment training classes or from paying wages for attending the required preassignment training classes.

4. After June 30, 1992, a person is guilty of a gross misdemeanor if he or she performs the functions and duties of an armed private security guard in this state unless the person holds a valid armed private security guard license issued by the department.

5. After June 30, 1992, it is a gross misdemeanor for a private security company to hire, contract with, or otherwise engage the services of an unlicensed armed private security guard knowing that he or she does not have a valid armed private security guard license issued by the director.

6. It is a gross misdemeanor for a person to possess or use any vehicle or equipment displaying the word "police" or "law enforcement officer" or having any sign, shield, marking, accessory, or insignia that indicates that the equipment or vehicle belongs to a public law enforcement agency.

7. It is a gross misdemeanor for any person who performs the functions and duties of a private security guard to use any name that includes the word "police" or "law enforcement" or that portrays the individual or a business as a public law enforcement agency.

8. It is the duty of all officers of the state and political subdivisions thereof to enforce the provisions of this chapter. The attorney general shall act as legal adviser of the director, and render such legal assistance as may be necessary in carrying out the provisions of this chapter.

\[ [1995 c 277 § 11](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/1995-96/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/House/1679-S.SL.pdf?cite=1995%20c%20277%20§%2011); [1991 c 334 § 16](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/1991-92/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/Senate/5124-S2.SL.pdf?cite=1991%20c%20334%20§%2016); \]

## 18.170.164 - License suspension—Noncompliance with support order—Reissuance.
The director shall immediately suspend any license issued under this chapter if the holder has been certified pursuant to RCW 74.20A.320 by the department of social and health services as a person who is not in compliance with a support order or a *residential or visitation order. If the person has continued to meet all other requirements for reinstatement during the suspension, reissuance of the license shall be automatic upon the director's receipt of a release issued by the department of social and health services stating that the person is in compliance with the order.

\[ [1997 c 58 § 838](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/1997-98/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/House/3901.SL.pdf?cite=1997%20c%2058%20§%20838); \]

## 18.170.165 - Transfer of license.
A licensee who transfers from one company to another must submit a transfer application on a form prescribed by the director along with a transfer fee established by the director.

\[ [1995 c 277 § 2](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/1995-96/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/House/1679-S.SL.pdf?cite=1995%20c%20277%20§%202); \]

## 18.170.170 - Unprofessional conduct.
In addition to the unprofessional conduct described in RCW 18.235.130, the following conduct, acts, or conditions constitute unprofessional conduct:

1. Knowingly violating any of the provisions of this chapter or the rules adopted under this chapter;

2. Practicing fraud, deceit, or misrepresentation in any of the private security activities covered by this chapter;

3. Knowingly making a material misstatement or omission in the application for a firearms certificate;

4. Not meeting the qualifications set forth in RCW 18.170.030, 18.170.040, or 18.170.060;

5. Failing to return immediately on demand a firearm issued by an employer;

6. Carrying a firearm in the performance of his or her duties if not the holder of a valid armed private security guard license, or carrying a firearm not meeting the provisions of this chapter while in the performance of his or her duties;

7. Failing to return immediately on demand any uniform, badge, or other item of equipment issued to the private security guard by an employer;

8. Making any statement that would reasonably cause another person to believe that the private security guard is a sworn peace officer;

9. Divulging confidential information that may compromise the security of any premises, or valuables shipment, or any activity of a client to which he or she was assigned;

10. Assigning or transferring any license issued pursuant to the provisions of this chapter, except as provided in RCW 18.170.060;

11. Failure to maintain insurance; and

12. Failure to have a qualifying principal in place.

\[ [2002 c 86 § 248](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/2001-02/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/House/2512-S.SL.pdf?cite=2002%20c%2086%20§%20248); [1997 c 58 § 837](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/1997-98/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/House/3901.SL.pdf?cite=1997%20c%2058%20§%20837); [1995 c 277 § 12](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/1995-96/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/House/1679-S.SL.pdf?cite=1995%20c%20277%20§%2012); [1991 c 334 § 17](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/1991-92/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/Senate/5124-S2.SL.pdf?cite=1991%20c%20334%20§%2017); \]

## 18.170.175 - Display of firearms while soliciting clients.
No licensee, employee or agent of a licensee, or anyone accompanying a licensee, employee, or agent may display a firearm while soliciting a client.

\[ [1995 c 277 § 3](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/1995-96/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/House/1679-S.SL.pdf?cite=1995%20c%20277%20§%203); \]

## 18.170.180 - Authority of director.
The director or the director's designee has the following authority in administering this chapter:

1. To adopt, amend, and rescind rules as deemed necessary to carry out this chapter;

2. To adopt standards of professional conduct or practice; and

3. To employ such administrative and clerical staff as necessary for the enforcement of this chapter.

\[ [2007 c 256 § 9](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/2007-08/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/House/1574-S.SL.pdf?cite=2007%20c%20256%20§%209); [2002 c 86 § 249](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/2001-02/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/House/2512-S.SL.pdf?cite=2002%20c%2086%20§%20249); [1991 c 334 § 18](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/1991-92/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/Senate/5124-S2.SL.pdf?cite=1991%20c%20334%20§%2018); \]

## 18.170.210 - Application of administrative procedure act to hearings.
The procedures governing adjudicative proceedings before agencies under chapter 34.05 RCW, the administrative procedure act, govern all hearings before the director.

\[ [1991 c 334 § 21](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/1991-92/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/Senate/5124-S2.SL.pdf?cite=1991%20c%20334%20§%2021); \]

## 18.170.220 - Inability to practice by reason of a mental or physical condition—Statement of charges—Hearing—Sanctions—Examinations—Presumed consent.
1. If the director believes a license holder or applicant may be unable to practice with reasonable skill and safety to the public by reason of a mental or physical condition, a statement of charges shall be served on the license holder or applicant and notice shall also be issued providing an opportunity for a hearing. The hearing shall be limited to the sole issue of the capacity of the license holder or applicant to practice with reasonable skill or safety. If the director determines that the license holder or applicant is unable to practice with reasonable skill and safety for one of the reasons stated in this subsection, the director shall impose such sanctions as are deemed necessary to protect the public.

2. In investigating or adjudicating a complaint or report that a license holder or applicant may be unable to practice with reasonable skill or safety by reason of a mental or physical condition, the department may require a license holder or applicant to submit to a mental or physical examination by one or more licensed or certified health professionals designated by the director. The cost of the examinations ordered by the department shall be paid by the department. In addition to any examinations ordered by the department, the licensee may submit physical or mental examination reports from licensed or certified health professionals of the license holder's or applicant's choosing and expense. Failure of the license holder or applicant to submit to examination when directed constitutes grounds for immediate suspension or withholding of the license, consequent upon which a default and final order may be entered without the taking of testimony or presentations of evidence, unless the failure was due to circumstances beyond the person's control. A determination by a court of competent jurisdiction that a license holder or applicant is mentally incompetent or mentally ill is presumptive evidence of the license holder's or applicant's inability to practice with reasonable skill and safety. An individual affected under this section shall at reasonable intervals be afforded an opportunity to demonstrate that the individual can resume competent practice with reasonable skill and safety to the public.

3. For the purpose of subsection (2) of this section, an applicant or license holder governed by this chapter, by making application, practicing, or filing a license renewal, is deemed to have given consent to submit to a mental, physical, or psychological examination if directed in writing by the department and further to have waived all objections to the admissibility or use of the examining health professional's testimony or examination reports by the director on the ground that the testimony or reports constitute hearsay or privileged communications.

\[ [1991 c 334 § 22](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/1991-92/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/Senate/5124-S2.SL.pdf?cite=1991%20c%20334%20§%2022); \]

## 18.170.230 - Unprofessional conduct or inability to practice—Penalties.
Upon a finding that a license holder or applicant has committed unprofessional conduct or is unable to practice with reasonable skill and safety due to a physical or mental condition, the director may issue an order providing for one or any combination of the following:

1. Revocation of the license;

2. Suspension of the license for a fixed or indefinite term;

3. Restriction or limitation of the practice;

4. Requiring the satisfactory completion of a specific program of remedial education or treatment;

5. Monitoring of the practice by a supervisor approved by the director;

6. Censure or reprimand;

7. Compliance with conditions of probation for a designated period of time;

8. Withholding a license request;

9. Other corrective action; 

10. Refund of fees billed to and collected from the consumer; or

11. The assessment of administrative penalties.

Any of the actions under this section may be totally or partly stayed by the director. All costs associated with compliance with orders issued under this section are the obligation of the license holder or applicant.

\[ [1995 c 277 § 15](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/1995-96/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/House/1679-S.SL.pdf?cite=1995%20c%20277%20§%2015); [1991 c 334 § 23](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/1991-92/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/Senate/5124-S2.SL.pdf?cite=1991%20c%20334%20§%2023); \]

## 18.170.280 - Application of administrative procedure act to acts of the director.
The director, in implementing and administering the provisions of this chapter, shall act in accordance with the administrative procedure act, chapter 34.05 RCW.

\[ [1991 c 334 § 28](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/1991-92/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/Senate/5124-S2.SL.pdf?cite=1991%20c%20334%20§%2028); \]

## 18.170.290 - Uniform regulation of business and professions act.
The uniform regulation of business and professions act, chapter 18.235 RCW, governs unlicensed practice, the issuance and denial of licenses, and the discipline of licensees under this chapter.

\[ [2002 c 86 § 250](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/2001-02/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/House/2512-S.SL.pdf?cite=2002%20c%2086%20§%20250); \]

## 18.170.300 - Reciprocity agreements.
The director has the authority to negotiate reciprocity agreements with other states allowing licensed security officers from Washington to work in those other states.

\[ [2004 c 50 § 3](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/2003-04/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/House/2657-S.SL.pdf?cite=2004%20c%2050%20§%203); \]

## 18.170.310 - Military training or experience.
An applicant with military training or experience satisfies the training or experience requirements of this chapter unless the director determines that the military training or experience is not substantially equivalent to the standards of this state.

\[ [2011 c 351 § 11](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/2011-12/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/House/1418.SL.pdf?cite=2011%20c%20351%20§%2011); \]

## 18.170.902 - Effective date—1995 c 277.
This act is necessary for the immediate preservation of the public peace, health, or safety, or support of the state government and its existing public institutions, and shall take effect immediately [May 9, 1995].

\[ [1995 c 277 § 41](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/1995-96/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/House/1679-S.SL.pdf?cite=1995%20c%20277%20§%2041); \]

