# Substitute Senate Bill 5241 as Recommended by Human Services, Reentry & Rehabilitation

[Source](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/2021-22/Xml/Bills/Senate%20Bills/5241-S.xml)
## Section 1
The legislature declares that economic inclusion shall be a top priority of Washington state's economic recovery. The legislature finds that the novel coronavirus has had a disproportionate effect upon at-risk communities. The legislature recognizes that for communities to thrive and remain vibrant, that recovery needs to be inclusive of people who are furthest away from opportunity and disproportionally more likely to experience economic hardship. The legislature acknowledges that stand-alone human service programs meet a pressing need but can be difficult to access for those lacking the resources to do so. The legislature recognizes that barriers to access can delay reentry into the workforce and career development. The legislature finds that leveraging or supporting the integration of existing benefits and services whenever possible will help people access the benefits they need to help them move out of poverty, without creating another duplicative system. The legislature finds that incorporating people with lived experience into systems development can help improve meaningful access to state programs. The legislature, therefore, intends to help facilitate an inclusive economic recovery by creating an economic inclusion grant program to provide greater access to resources for those in need.
