# 43.63A - Department of community, trade, and economic development.
* [43.63A.066 - Child abuse and neglect prevention training for participants in head start or early childhood education assistance programs—Duties of department of children, youth, and families.](#4363a066---child-abuse-and-neglect-prevention-training-for-participants-in-head-start-or-early-childhood-education-assistance-programsduties-of-department-of-children-youth-and-families)
* [43.63A.068 - Advisory committee on policies and programs for children and families with incarcerated parents—Funding for programs and services.](#4363a068---advisory-committee-on-policies-and-programs-for-children-and-families-with-incarcerated-parentsfunding-for-programs-and-services)
* [43.63A.075 - Community development finance program.](#4363a075---community-development-finance-program)
* [43.63A.105 - Considerations in designating local community action and community service agencies.](#4363a105---considerations-in-designating-local-community-action-and-community-service-agencies)
* [43.63A.115 - Community action agency network—Delivery system for federal and state antipoverty programs.](#4363a115---community-action-agency-networkdelivery-system-for-federal-and-state-antipoverty-programs)
* [43.63A.125 - Nonresidential social services facilities—Building communities fund program—Assistance to nonprofit organizations—Competitive process—Recommendations to legislature for funding.](#4363a125---nonresidential-social-services-facilitiesbuilding-communities-fund-programassistance-to-nonprofit-organizationscompetitive-processrecommendations-to-legislature-for-funding)
* [43.63A.135 - Nonresidential youth services facilities—Competitive process—Recommendations to legislature for funding.](#4363a135---nonresidential-youth-services-facilitiescompetitive-processrecommendations-to-legislature-for-funding)
* [43.63A.155 - Local government bond information—Publication—Rules.](#4363a155---local-government-bond-informationpublicationrules)
* [43.63A.190 - Distribution of funds for border areas.](#4363a190---distribution-of-funds-for-border-areas)
* [43.63A.215 - Accessory apartments—Development and placement—Local governments.](#4363a215---accessory-apartmentsdevelopment-and-placementlocal-governments)
* [43.63A.230 - Employee ownership and self-management—Technical assistance and educational programs.](#4363a230---employee-ownership-and-self-managementtechnical-assistance-and-educational-programs)
* [43.63A.275 - Retired senior volunteer programs (RSVP)—Funds distribution.](#4363a275---retired-senior-volunteer-programs-rsvpfunds-distribution)
* [43.63A.305 - Independent youth housing program—Created—Collaboration with the department of social and health services—Duties of subcontractor organizations.](#4363a305---independent-youth-housing-programcreatedcollaboration-with-the-department-of-social-and-health-servicesduties-of-subcontractor-organizations)
* [43.63A.307 - Independent youth housing program—Definitions.](#4363a307---independent-youth-housing-programdefinitions)
* [43.63A.309 - Independent youth housing program—Eligible youth—Participation.](#4363a309---independent-youth-housing-programeligible-youthparticipation)
* [43.63A.311 - Independent youth housing program—Subcontractor organization performance review and report.](#4363a311---independent-youth-housing-programsubcontractor-organization-performance-review-and-report)
* [43.63A.313 - Independent youth housing program—Limitations.](#4363a313---independent-youth-housing-programlimitations)
* [43.63A.315 - Independent youth housing account.](#4363a315---independent-youth-housing-account)
* [43.63A.400 - Grants to public broadcast stations.](#4363a400---grants-to-public-broadcast-stations)
* [43.63A.410 - Grants to broadcast stations eligible for grants from corporation for public broadcasting—Formula—Annual financial statements.](#4363a410---grants-to-broadcast-stations-eligible-for-grants-from-corporation-for-public-broadcastingformulaannual-financial-statements)
* [43.63A.420 - Grants to other broadcast stations—Eligibility—Amounts.](#4363a420---grants-to-other-broadcast-stationseligibilityamounts)
* [43.63A.470 - Manufactured housing—Inspections, investigations. (Contingent expiration date.)](#4363a470---manufactured-housinginspections-investigations-contingent-expiration-date)
* [43.63A.475 - Manufactured housing—Rules. (Contingent expiration date.)](#4363a475---manufactured-housingrules-contingent-expiration-date)
* [43.63A.480 - Manufactured housing—Hearing procedures. (Contingent expiration date.)](#4363a480---manufactured-housinghearing-procedures-contingent-expiration-date)
* [43.63A.485 - Manufactured housing—Violations—Fines. (Contingent expiration date.)](#4363a485---manufactured-housingviolationsfines-contingent-expiration-date)
* [43.63A.490 - Manufactured housing—Contingent expiration date.](#4363a490---manufactured-housingcontingent-expiration-date)
* [43.63A.500 - Farmworker housing construction manuals and plans.](#4363a500---farmworker-housing-construction-manuals-and-plans)
* [43.63A.505 - Agricultural employee housing—One-stop clearinghouse.](#4363a505---agricultural-employee-housingone-stop-clearinghouse)
* [43.63A.510 - Affordable housing—Inventory of state-owned land.](#4363a510---affordable-housinginventory-of-state-owned-land)
* [43.63A.550 - Growth management—Inventorying and collecting data.](#4363a550---growth-managementinventorying-and-collecting-data)
* [43.63A.610 - Emergency mortgage assistance—Guidelines.](#4363a610---emergency-mortgage-assistanceguidelines)
* [43.63A.620 - Emergency rental assistance—Guidelines.](#4363a620---emergency-rental-assistanceguidelines)
* [43.63A.630 - Emergency mortgage and rental assistance program—Eligibility.](#4363a630---emergency-mortgage-and-rental-assistance-programeligibility)
* [43.63A.640 - Emergency mortgage and rental assistance program—Duties—Interest rate, assignment, eligibility.](#4363a640---emergency-mortgage-and-rental-assistance-programdutiesinterest-rate-assignment-eligibility)
* [43.63A.645 - Emergency housing programs—Rules.](#4363a645---emergency-housing-programsrules)
* [43.63A.650 - Housing—Department's responsibilities.](#4363a650---housingdepartments-responsibilities)
* [43.63A.660 - Housing—Technical assistance and information, affordable housing.](#4363a660---housingtechnical-assistance-and-information-affordable-housing)
* [43.63A.670 - Home-matching program—Finding, purpose.](#4363a670---home-matching-programfinding-purpose)
* [43.63A.680 - Home-matching program—Pilot programs.](#4363a680---home-matching-programpilot-programs)
* [43.63A.690 - Minority and women-owned business enterprises—Linked deposit program.](#4363a690---minority-and-women-owned-business-enterpriseslinked-deposit-program)
* [43.63A.720 - Prostitution prevention and intervention services—Grant program.](#4363a720---prostitution-prevention-and-intervention-servicesgrant-program)
* [43.63A.725 - Prostitution prevention and intervention grants—Eligibility.](#4363a725---prostitution-prevention-and-intervention-grantseligibility)
* [43.63A.730 - Prostitution prevention and intervention grants—Applications, contents.](#4363a730---prostitution-prevention-and-intervention-grantsapplications-contents)
* [43.63A.735 - Prostitution prevention and intervention grants—Award and use.](#4363a735---prostitution-prevention-and-intervention-grantsaward-and-use)
* [43.63A.740 - Prostitution prevention and intervention account.](#4363a740---prostitution-prevention-and-intervention-account)
* [43.63A.750 - Performing arts, art museums, cultural facilities—Competitive grant program for nonprofit organizations.](#4363a750---performing-arts-art-museums-cultural-facilitiescompetitive-grant-program-for-nonprofit-organizations)
* [43.63A.764 - Building communities fund program—Definitions.](#4363a764---building-communities-fund-programdefinitions)
* [43.63A.766 - Building communities fund account.](#4363a766---building-communities-fund-account)
* [43.63A.768 - Building communities fund program—Accountability and reporting standards—Annual report.](#4363a768---building-communities-fund-programaccountability-and-reporting-standardsannual-report)
## 43.63A.066 - Child abuse and neglect prevention training for participants in head start or early childhood education assistance programs—Duties of department of children, youth, and families.
The department of children, youth, and families shall have primary responsibility for providing child abuse and neglect prevention training to preschool age children participating in the federal head start program or the early childhood education and assistance program established under RCW 28A.215.010 through 28A.215.050, 43.216.500 through 43.216.550, 43.216.900, and 43.216.901.

\[ [2018 c 58 § 4](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/2017-18/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/Senate/6287.SL.pdf?cite=2018%20c%2058%20§%204); [2006 c 265 § 212](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/2005-06/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/House/2964-S2.SL.pdf?cite=2006%20c%20265%20§%20212); [1993 c 280 § 58](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/1993-94/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/Senate/5868-S.SL.pdf?cite=1993%20c%20280%20§%2058); [1990 c 33 § 579](http://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1990c33.pdf?cite=1990%20c%2033%20§%20579); [1987 c 489 § 4](http://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1987c489.pdf?cite=1987%20c%20489%20§%204); \]

## 43.63A.068 - Advisory committee on policies and programs for children and families with incarcerated parents—Funding for programs and services.
1. [Empty]

   a. The department of commerce shall establish an advisory committee to monitor, guide, and report on recommendations relating to policies and programs for children and families with incarcerated parents.

   b. The advisory committee shall include representatives of the department of corrections, the department of social and health services, the department of children, youth, and families, the office of the superintendent of public instruction, representatives of the private nonprofit and business sectors, child advocates, representatives of Washington state Indian tribes as defined under the federal Indian welfare act (25 U.S.C. Sec. 1901 et seq.), court administrators, the administrative office of the courts, the Washington association of sheriffs and police chiefs, jail administrators, the office of the governor, and others who have an interest in these issues.

   c. The advisory committee shall:

      i. Gather the data collected by the departments as required in RCW 72.09.495, 74.04.800, 43.216.060, and 28A.300.520;

      ii. Monitor and provide consultation on the implementation of recommendations contained in the 2006 children of incarcerated parents report;

      iii. Identify areas of need and develop recommendations for the legislature, the department of social and health services, the department of corrections, the department of children, youth, and families, and the office of the superintendent of public instruction to better meet the needs of children and families of persons incarcerated in department of corrections facilities; and

      iv. Advise the department of commerce regarding community programs the department should fund with moneys appropriated for this purpose in the operating budget. The advisory committee shall provide recommendations to the department regarding the following:

          A.  The goals for geographic distribution of programs and funding;

          B.  The scope and purpose of eligible services and the priority of such services;

          C.  Grant award funding limits;

          D.  Entities eligible to apply for the funding;

          E.  Whether the funding should be directed towards starting or supporting new programs, expanding existing programs, or whether the funding should be open to all eligible services and providers; and

          F.  Other areas the advisory committee determines appropriate.

   d. The children of incarcerated parents advisory committee shall update the legislature and governor biennially on committee activities, with the first update due by January 1, 2010.

2. The department of commerce shall select community programs or services to receive funding that focus on children and families of inmates incarcerated in a department of corrections facility and sustaining the family during the period of the inmate's incarceration.

   a. Programs or services which meet the needs of the children of incarcerated parents should be the greatest consideration in the programs that are identified by the department.

   b. The department shall consider the recommendations of the advisory committee regarding which services or programs the department should fund.

   c. The programs selected shall collaborate with an agency, or agencies, experienced in providing services to aid families and victims of sexual assault and domestic violence to ensure that the programs identify families who have a history of sexual assault or domestic violence and ensure the services provided are appropriate for the children and families.

\[ [2018 c 58 § 3](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/2017-18/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/Senate/6287.SL.pdf?cite=2018%20c%2058%20§%203); [2009 c 518 § 18](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/2009-10/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/House/2327-S.SL.pdf?cite=2009%20c%20518%20§%2018); [2007 c 384 § 6](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/2007-08/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/House/1422-S2.SL.pdf?cite=2007%20c%20384%20§%206); \]

## 43.63A.075 - Community development finance program.
The department shall establish a community development finance program. Pursuant to this program, the department shall, in cooperation with the local economic development council: (1) Develop expertise in federal, state, and local community and economic development programs; and (2) assist communities and businesses to secure available financing. To the extent permitted by federal law, the department is encouraged to use federal community block grant funds to make urban development action grants to communities which have not been eligible to receive such grants prior to June 30, 1984.

\[ [1999 c 108 § 1](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/1999-00/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/House/1686-S2.SL.pdf?cite=1999%20c%20108%20§%201); [1993 c 280 § 59](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/1993-94/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/Senate/5868-S.SL.pdf?cite=1993%20c%20280%20§%2059); [1985 c 466 § 53](http://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1985c466.pdf?cite=1985%20c%20466%20§%2053); [1984 c 125 § 6](http://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1984c125.pdf?cite=1984%20c%20125%20§%206); \]

## 43.63A.105 - Considerations in designating local community action and community service agencies.
In designating local community action agencies or local community service agencies, the department shall give special consideration to (1) agencies previously funded under any community services or antipoverty program; (2) agencies meeting state and federal program and fiscal requirements; and (3) successors to such agencies.

\[ [1984 c 125 § 10](http://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1984c125.pdf?cite=1984%20c%20125%20§%2010); \]

## 43.63A.115 - Community action agency network—Delivery system for federal and state antipoverty programs.
1. The community action agency network, established initially under the federal economic opportunity act of 1964 and subsequently under the federal community services block grant program of 1981, as amended, shall be a delivery system for federal and state antipoverty programs in this state, including but not limited to the community services block grant program, the low-income energy assistance program, and the federal department of energy weatherization program.

2. Local community action agencies comprise the community action agency network. The community action agency network shall serve low-income persons in the counties. Each community action agency and its service area shall be designated in the state federal community service block grant plan as prepared by the *department of community, trade, and economic development.

3. Funds for antipoverty programs may be distributed to the community action agencies by the *department of community, trade, and economic development and other state agencies in consultation with the authorized representatives of community action agency networks.

\[ [1993 c 280 § 60](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/1993-94/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/Senate/5868-S.SL.pdf?cite=1993%20c%20280%20§%2060); [1990 c 156 § 1](http://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1990c156.pdf?cite=1990%20c%20156%20§%201); \]

## 43.63A.125 - Nonresidential social services facilities—Building communities fund program—Assistance to nonprofit organizations—Competitive process—Recommendations to legislature for funding.
1. The department shall establish the building communities fund program. Under the program, capital and technical assistance grants may be made to nonprofit organizations for acquiring, constructing, or rehabilitating facilities used for the delivery of nonresidential community services, including social service centers and multipurpose community centers, including those serving a distinct or ethnic population. Such facilities must be located in a distressed community or serve a substantial number of low-income or disadvantaged persons.

2. The department shall establish a competitive process to solicit, evaluate, and rank applications for the building communities fund program as follows:

   a. The department shall conduct a statewide solicitation of project applications from nonprofit organizations.

   b. The department shall evaluate and rank applications in consultation with a citizen advisory committee using objective criteria. To be considered qualified, applicants must demonstrate that the proposed project:

      i. Will increase the range, efficiency, or quality of the services provided to citizens;

      ii. Will be located in a distressed community or will serve a substantial number of low-income or disadvantaged persons;

      iii. Will offer three or more distinct activities that meet a single community service objective or offer a diverse set of activities that meet multiple community service objectives, including but not limited to: Providing social services; expanding employment opportunities for or increasing the employability of community residents; or offering educational or recreational opportunities separate from the public school system or private schools, as long as recreation is not the sole purpose of the facility;

      iv. Reflects a long-term vision for the development of the community, shared by residents, businesses, leaders, and partners;

      v. Requires state funding to accomplish a discrete, usable phase of the project;

      vi. Is ready to proceed and will make timely use of the funds;

      vii. Is sponsored by one or more entities that have the organizational and financial capacity to fulfill the terms of the grant agreement and to maintain the project into the future;

      viii. Fills an unmet need for community services;

      ix. Will achieve its stated objectives; and

      x. Is a community priority as shown through tangible commitments of existing or future assets made to the project by community residents, leaders, businesses, and government partners.

   c. The evaluation and ranking process shall also include an examination of existing assets that applicants may apply to projects. Grant assistance under this section shall not exceed twenty-five percent of the total cost of the project, except, under exceptional circumstances, the department may reduce the amount of nonstate match required. However, during the 2019-2021 biennium, the legislature may waive the match required for the projects specified in section 1009, chapter 413, Laws of 2019. No more than ten percent of the total granted amount may be awarded to qualified eligible projects that meet the definition of exceptional circumstances defined in this subsection. For purposes of this subsection, exceptional circumstances include but are not limited to: Natural disasters affecting projects; emergencies beyond an applicant's control, such as a fire or an unanticipated loss of a lease where services are currently provided; or a delay that could result in a threat to public health or safety. The nonstate portion of the total project cost may include cash, the value of real property when acquired solely for the purpose of the project, and in-kind contributions.

   d. The department may not set a monetary limit to funding requests.

3. The department shall submit biennially to the governor and the legislature in the department's capital budget request a ranked list of the qualified eligible projects for which applications were received. The list must include a description of each project, its total cost, and the amount of state funding requested. The appropriate fiscal committees of the legislature shall use this list to determine building communities fund projects that may receive funding in the capital budget. The total amount of state capital funding available for all projects on the biennial list shall be determined by the capital budget beginning with the 2009-2011 biennium and thereafter. In addition, if cash funds have been appropriated, up to three million dollars may be used for technical assistance grants. The department shall not sign contracts or otherwise financially obligate funds under this section until the legislature has approved a specific list of projects.

4. In addition to the list of ranked qualified eligible projects, the department shall submit to the appropriate fiscal committees of the legislature a summary report that describes the solicitation and evaluation processes, including but not limited to the number of applications received, the total amount of funding requested, issues encountered, if any, and any recommendations for process improvements.

5. After the legislature has approved a specific list of projects in law, the department shall develop and manage appropriate contracts with the selected applicants; monitor project expenditures and grantee performance; report project and contract information; and exercise due diligence and other contract management responsibilities as required.

6. In contracts for grants authorized under this section the department shall include provisions which require that capital improvements shall be held by the grantee for a specified period of time appropriate to the amount of the grant and that facilities shall be used for the express purpose of the grant. If the grantee is found to be out of compliance with provisions of the contract, the grantee shall repay to the state general fund the principal amount of the grant plus interest calculated at the rate of interest on state of Washington general obligation bonds issued most closely to the date of authorization of the grant.

\[ [2019 c 413 § 7030](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/2019-20/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/House/1102-S.SL.pdf?cite=2019%20c%20413%20§%207030); [2011 1st sp.s. c 48 § 7027](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/2011-12/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/House/1497-S.SL.pdf?cite=2011%201st%20sp.s.%20c%2048%20§%207027); [2008 c 327 § 15](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/2007-08/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/Senate/6855-S2.SL.pdf?cite=2008%20c%20327%20§%2015); [2006 c 371 § 233](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/2005-06/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/Senate/6384-S.SL.pdf?cite=2006%20c%20371%20§%20233); [2005 c 160 § 1](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/2005-06/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/House/1577-S.SL.pdf?cite=2005%20c%20160%20§%201); [1999 c 295 § 3](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/1999-00/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/House/1222-S.SL.pdf?cite=1999%20c%20295%20§%203); [1997 c 374 § 2](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/1997-98/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/House/1325-S.SL.pdf?cite=1997%20c%20374%20§%202); \]

## 43.63A.135 - Nonresidential youth services facilities—Competitive process—Recommendations to legislature for funding.
1. The *department of community, trade, and economic development must establish a competitive process to solicit proposals for and prioritize projects whose primary objective is to assist nonprofit youth organizations in acquiring, constructing, or rehabilitating facilities used for the delivery of nonresidential services, excluding outdoor athletic fields.

2. The *department of community, trade, and economic development must establish a competitive process to prioritize applications for the assistance as follows:

   a. The *department of community, trade, and economic development must conduct a statewide solicitation of project applications from local governments, nonprofit organizations, and other entities, as determined by the *department of community, trade, and economic development. The *department of community, trade, and economic development must evaluate and rank applications in consultation with a citizen advisory committee using objective criteria. Projects must have a major recreational component, and must have either an educational or social service component. At a minimum, applicants must demonstrate that the requested assistance will increase the efficiency or quality of the services it provides to youth. The evaluation and ranking process must also include an examination of existing assets that applicants may apply to projects. Grant assistance under this section may not exceed twenty-five percent of the total cost of the project. The nonstate portion of the total project cost may include cash, the value of real property when acquired solely for the purpose of the project, and in-kind contributions.

   b. The *department of community, trade, and economic development must submit a prioritized list of recommended projects to the governor and the legislature in the department of community, trade, and economic development's biennial capital budget request beginning with the 2005-2007 biennium and thereafter. The list must include a description of each project, the amount of recommended state funding, and documentation of nonstate funds to be used for the project. The total amount of recommended state funding for projects on a biennial project list must not exceed eight million dollars. The *department of community, trade, and economic development may not sign contracts or otherwise financially obligate funds under this section until the legislature has approved a specific list of projects.

   c. In contracts for grants authorized under this section the *department of community, trade, and economic development must include provisions that require that capital improvements be held by the grantee for a specified period of time appropriate to the amount of the grant and that facilities be used for the express purpose of the grant. If the grantee is found to be out of compliance with provisions of the contract, the grantee must repay to the state general fund the principal amount of the grant plus interest calculated at the rate of interest on state of Washington general obligation bonds issued most closely to the date of authorization of the grant.

\[ [2006 c 371 § 234](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/2005-06/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/Senate/6384-S.SL.pdf?cite=2006%20c%20371%20§%20234); [2005 c 160 § 4](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/2005-06/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/House/1577-S.SL.pdf?cite=2005%20c%20160%20§%204); [2003 1st sp.s. c 7 § 2](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/2003-04/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/House/1782-S.SL.pdf?cite=2003%201st%20sp.s.%20c%207%20§%202); \]

## 43.63A.155 - Local government bond information—Publication—Rules.
The *department of community, trade, and economic development shall retain the bond information it receives under RCW 39.44.210 and 39.44.230 and shall publish summaries of local government bond issues at least once a year.

The *department of community, trade, and economic development shall adopt rules under chapter 34.05 RCW to implement RCW 39.44.210 and 39.44.230.

\[ [1993 c 280 § 61](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/1993-94/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/Senate/5868-S.SL.pdf?cite=1993%20c%20280%20§%2061); [1989 c 225 § 5](http://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1989c225.pdf?cite=1989%20c%20225%20§%205); [1985 c 130 § 6](http://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1985c130.pdf?cite=1985%20c%20130%20§%206); \]

## 43.63A.190 - Distribution of funds for border areas.
Funds appropriated by the legislature as supplemental resources for border areas must be distributed by the state treasurer pursuant to the formula for distributing funds to border areas, and expenditure requirements for such distributions, under RCW 66.08.196.

\[ [2012 2nd sp.s. c 5 § 12](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/2011-12/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/House/2823-S.SL.pdf?cite=2012%202nd%20sp.s.%20c%205%20§%2012); [1995 c 159 § 5](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/1995-96/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/Senate/5378.SL.pdf?cite=1995%20c%20159%20§%205); [1984 c 125 § 11](http://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1984c125.pdf?cite=1984%20c%20125%20§%2011); [1981 c 269 § 2](http://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1981c269.pdf?cite=1981%20c%20269%20§%202); \]

## 43.63A.215 - Accessory apartments—Development and placement—Local governments.
1. The department shall, in consultation with the affordable housing advisory board created in RCW 43.185B.020, report to the legislature on the development and placement of accessory apartments. The department shall produce a written report by December 15, 1993, which:

   a. Identifies local governments that allow the siting of accessory apartments in areas zoned for single-family residential use; and

   b. Makes recommendations to the legislature designed to encourage the development and placement of accessory apartments in areas zoned for single-family residential use.

2. The recommendations made under subsection (1) of this section shall not take effect before ninety days following adjournment of the 1994 regular legislative session.

3. Unless provided otherwise by the legislature, by December 31, 1994, local governments shall incorporate in their development regulations, zoning regulations, or official controls the recommendations contained in subsection (1) of this section. The accessory apartment provisions shall be part of the local government's development regulation, zoning regulation, or official control. To allow local flexibility, the recommendations shall be subject to such regulations, conditions, procedures, and limitations as determined by the local legislative authority.

4. As used in this section, "local government" means:

   a. A city or code city with a population that exceeds twenty thousand;

   b. A county that is required to or has elected to plan under the state growth management act; and

   c. A county with a population that exceeds one hundred twenty-five thousand.

\[ [1993 c 478 § 7](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/1993-94/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/Senate/5584.SL.pdf?cite=1993%20c%20478%20§%207); \]

## 43.63A.230 - Employee ownership and self-management—Technical assistance and educational programs.
The *department of community, trade, and economic development shall provide technical assistance to cooperatives authorized under chapter 23.78 RCW and conduct educational programs on employee ownership and self-management. The department shall include information on the option of employee ownership wherever appropriate in its various programs.

\[ [2005 c 136 § 2](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/2005-06/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/Senate/5176-S.SL.pdf?cite=2005%20c%20136%20§%202); [1993 c 280 § 63](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/1993-94/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/Senate/5868-S.SL.pdf?cite=1993%20c%20280%20§%2063); [1988 c 186 § 17](http://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1988c186.pdf?cite=1988%20c%20186%20§%2017); [1987 c 457 § 15](http://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1987c457.pdf?cite=1987%20c%20457%20§%2015); \]

## 43.63A.275 - Retired senior volunteer programs (RSVP)—Funds distribution.
1. Each biennium the *department of community, trade, and economic development shall distribute such funds as are appropriated for retired senior volunteer programs (RSVP) as follows:

   a. At least sixty-five percent of the moneys may be distributed according to formulae and criteria to be determined by the *department of community, trade, and economic development in consultation with the RSVP directors association.

   b. Up to twenty percent of the moneys may be distributed by competitive grant process to develop RSVP projects in counties not presently being served, or to expand existing RSVP services into counties not presently served.

   c. Ten percent of the moneys may be used by the *department of community, trade, and economic development for administration, monitoring of the grants, and providing technical assistance to the RSVP projects.

   d. Up to five percent of the moneys may be used to support projects that will benefit RSVPs statewide.

2. Grants under subsection (1) of this section shall give priority to programs in the areas of education, tutoring, English as a second language, combating of and education on drug abuse, housing and homeless, and respite care, and shall be distributed in accordance with the following:

   a. None of the grant moneys may be used to displace any paid employee in the area being served.

   b. Grants shall be made for programs that focus on:

      i. Developing new roles for senior volunteers in nonprofit and public organizations with special emphasis on areas targeted in section 1, chapter 65, Laws of 1992. The roles shall reflect the diversity of the local senior population and shall respect their life experiences;

      ii. Increasing the expertise of volunteer managers and RSVP managers in the areas of communication, recruitment, motivation, and retention of today's over-sixty population;

      iii. Increasing the number of senior citizens recruited, referred, and placed with nonprofit and public organizations; and

      iv. Providing volunteer support such as: Mileage to and from the volunteer assignment, recognition, and volunteer insurance.

\[ [1993 c 280 § 67](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/1993-94/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/Senate/5868-S.SL.pdf?cite=1993%20c%20280%20§%2067); [1992 c 65 § 2](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/1991-92/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/House/2374.SL.pdf?cite=1992%20c%2065%20§%202); \]

## 43.63A.305 - Independent youth housing program—Created—Collaboration with the department of social and health services—Duties of subcontractor organizations.
1. The independent youth housing program is created in the department to provide housing stipends to eligible youth to be used for independent housing. In developing a plan for the design, implementation, and operation of the independent youth housing program, the department shall:

   a. Adopt policies, requirements, and procedures necessary to administer the program;

   b. Contract with one or more eligible organizations described under RCW 43.185A.040 to provide services and conduct administrative activities as described in subsection (3) of this section;

   c. Establish eligibility criteria for youth to participate in the independent youth housing program, giving priority to youth who have been dependents of the state for at least one year;

   d. Refer interested youth to the designated subcontractor organization administering the program in the area in which the youth intends to reside;

   e. Develop a method for determining the amount of the housing stipend, first and last month's rent, and security deposit, where applicable, to be dedicated to participating youth. The method for determining a housing stipend must take into account a youth's age, the youth's total income from all sources, the fair market rent for the area in which the youth lives or intends to live, and a variety of possible living situations for the youth. The amount of housing stipends must be adjusted, by a method and formula established by the department, to promote the successful transition for youth to complete housing self-sufficiency over time;

   f. Ensure that the independent youth housing program is integrated and aligned with other state rental assistance and case management programs operated by the department, as well as case management and supportive services programs, including the independent living program, the transitional living program, and other related programs offered by the department of social and health services; and

   g. Consult with the department of social and health services and other stakeholders involved with dependent youth, homeless youth, and homeless young adults, as appropriate.

2. The department of social and health services shall collaborate with the department in implementing and operating the independent youth housing program including, but not limited to, the following:

   a. Refer potential eligible youth to the department before the youth's eighteenth birthday, if feasible, to include an indication, if known, of where the youth plans to reside after aging out of foster care;

   b. Provide information to all youth aged fifteen or older, who are dependents of the state under chapter 13.34 RCW, about the independent youth housing program, encouraging dependents nearing their eighteenth birthday to consider applying for enrollment in the program;

   c. Encourage organizations participating in the independent living program and the transitional living program to collaborate with independent youth housing program providers whenever possible to capitalize on resources and provide the greatest amount and variety of services to eligible youth;

   d. Annually provide to the department data reflecting changes in the percentage of youth aging out of the state dependency system each year who are eligible for state assistance, as well as any other data and performance measures that may assist the department to measure program success; and

   e. Annually, beginning by December 31, 2007, provide to the appropriate committees of the legislature and the interagency council on homelessness as described under RCW 43.185C.170 recommendations of strategies to reach the goals described in RCW 43.63A.311(2)(g).

3. Under the independent youth housing program, subcontractor organizations shall:

   a. Use moneys awarded to the organizations for housing stipends, security deposits, first and last month's rent stipends, case management program costs, and administrative costs. When subcontractor organizations determine that it is necessary to assist participating youth in accessing and maintaining independent housing, subcontractor organizations may also use moneys awarded to pay for professional mental health services and tuition costs for court-ordered classes and programs;

      i. Administrative costs for each subcontractor organization may not exceed twelve percent of the estimated total annual grant amount to the subcontractor organization;

      ii. All housing stipends, security deposits, and first and last month's rent stipends must be payable only to a landlord or housing manager of any type of independent housing;

   b. Enroll eligible youth who are referred by the department and who choose to reside in their assigned service area;

   c. Enter eligible youth program participants into the [Washington] homeless client management information system as described in RCW 43.185C.180;

   d. Monitor participating youth's housing status;

   e. Evaluate participating youth's eligibility and compliance with department policies and procedures at least twice a year;

   f. Assist participating youth to develop or update an independent living plan focused on obtaining and retaining independent housing or collaborate with a case manager with whom the youth is already involved to ensure that the youth has an independent living plan;

   g. Educate participating youth on tenant rights and responsibilities;

   h. Provide support to participating youth in the form of general case management and information and referral services, when necessary, or collaborate with a case manager with whom the youth is already involved to ensure that the youth is receiving the case management and information and referral services needed;

   i. Connect participating youth, when possible, with individual development account programs, other financial literacy programs, and other programs that are designed to help young people acquire economic independence and self-sufficiency, or collaborate with a case manager with whom the youth is already involved to ensure that the youth is receiving information and referrals to these programs, when appropriate;

   j. Submit expenditure and performance reports, including information related to the performance measures in RCW 43.63A.311, to the department on a time schedule determined by the department; and

   k. Provide recommendations to the department regarding program improvements and strategies that might assist the state to reach its goals as described in RCW 43.63A.311(2)(g).

\[ [2009 c 148 § 1](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/2009-10/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/House/1492.SL.pdf?cite=2009%20c%20148%20§%201); [2007 c 316 § 3](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/2007-08/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/House/1922-S2.SL.pdf?cite=2007%20c%20316%20§%203); \]

## **43.63A.307 - Independent youth housing program—Definitions.**
The definitions in this section apply throughout this chapter unless the context clearly requires otherwise.

1. "Department" means the department of **commerce**.

2. "Eligible youth" means an individual who:

    a. On or after September 1, 2006, is at least eighteen, was a dependent of the state under chapter 13.34 RCW at any time  before his or her eighteenth birthday, and has not yet reached the age of **25**;

    b. Except as provided in RCW 43.63A.309(2)(a), has a total income from all sources, except for temporary sources that include, but are not limited to, overtime wages, bonuses, or short-term temporary assignments, that does not exceed fifty percent of the area median income;

    c.

Complies with other eligibility requirements the department may establish.

3. "Fair market rent" means the fair market rent in each county of the state, as determined by the United States department of housing and urban development.

4. "Independent housing" means a housing unit that is not owned by or located within the home of the eligible youth's biological parents or any of the eligible youth's former foster care families or dependency guardians. "Independent housing" may include a unit in a transitional or other supportive housing facility.

5. "Individual development account" or "account" means an account established by contract between a low‑income individual and a sponsoring organization for the benefit of the low‑income individual and funded through periodic contributions by the low‑income individual that are matched with contributions by or through the sponsoring organization.

6. "Subcontractor organization" means an eligible organization described under RCW 43.185A.040 that contracts with the department to administer the independent youth housing program.

## 43.63A.309 - Independent youth housing program—Eligible youth—Participation.
1. An eligible youth participating in the independent youth housing program must:

   a. Sign a program compliance agreement stating that the youth agrees to:

      i. Timely pay his or her portion of the independent housing cost;

      ii. Comply with an independent living plan; and

      iii. Comply with other program requirements and policies the department may establish; and

   b. Maintain his or her status as an eligible youth, except as provided in subsection (2) of this section.

2. The department shall establish policies and procedures to allow the youth to remain in the program and continue to receive a housing stipend if the youth's total income exceeds fifty percent of the area median income during the course of his or her participation in the program. The policies must require the youth to:

   a. Participate in the individual development account program established under RCW 43.31.460 and invest a portion, to be determined by the department, of his or her income that exceeds fifty percent of the area median income in an individual development account; or

   b. If the youth is unable to participate in the individual development account program due to the program's capacity limits or eligibility requirements, participate in an alternate supervised savings program approved by the department, as long as the youth qualifies for and may participate in this savings program.

3. An eligible youth may participate in the independent youth housing program for any duration of time and may apply to enroll in the program with the department at any time.

4. [Empty]

   a. A youth may be terminated from the independent youth housing program for a violation of department policies.

   b. Youth who are terminated from the program may apply to the department for reenrollment in the program through a procedure to be developed by the department. The department shall establish criteria to evaluate a reenrollment application and may accept or deny a reenrollment application based on the department's evaluation.

\[ [2007 c 316 § 4](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/2007-08/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/House/1922-S2.SL.pdf?cite=2007%20c%20316%20§%204); \]

## 43.63A.311 - Independent youth housing program—Subcontractor organization performance review and report.
Beginning in 2007, the department must annually review and report on the performance of subcontractor organizations participating in the independent youth housing program, as well as the performance of the program as a whole.

1. Reporting should be within the context of the state homeless housing strategic plan under RCW 43.185C.040 and any other relevant state or local homeless or affordable housing plans. The outcomes of the independent youth housing program must be included in the measurement of any performance measures described in chapter 43.185C RCW.

2. The independent youth housing program report must include, at a minimum, an update on the following program performance measures, as well as any other performance measures the department may establish, for enrolled youth in consultation with the department of social and health services, to be measured statewide and by county:

   a. Increases in housing stability;

   b. Increases in economic self-sufficiency;

   c. Increases in independent living skills;

   d. Increases in education and job training attainment;

   e. Decreases in the use of all state-funded services over time;

   f. Decreases in the percentage of youth aging out of the state dependency system each year who are eligible for state assistance as reported to the department by the department of social and health services; and

   g. Recommendations to the legislature and to the interagency council on homelessness as described under RCW 43.185C.170 on program improvements and on departmental strategies that might assist the state to reach its goals of:

      i. Ensuring that all youth aging out of the state dependency system have access to a decent, appropriate, and affordable home in a healthy safe environment to prevent such youth from experiencing homelessness; and

      ii. Reducing each year the percentage of young people eligible for state assistance upon aging out of the state dependency system.

\[ [2007 c 316 § 5](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/2007-08/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/House/1922-S2.SL.pdf?cite=2007%20c%20316%20§%205); \]

## 43.63A.313 - Independent youth housing program—Limitations.
Chapter 316, Laws of 2007 does not create:

1. An entitlement to services;

2. Judicial authority to (a) extend the jurisdiction of juvenile court in a proceeding under chapter 13.34 RCW to a youth who has reached the age of eighteen or (b) order the provision of services to the youth; or

3. A private right of action or claim on the part of any individual, entity, or agency against the department, the department of social and health services, or any contractor of the departments.

\[ [2007 c 316 § 6](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/2007-08/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/House/1922-S2.SL.pdf?cite=2007%20c%20316%20§%206); \]

## 43.63A.315 - Independent youth housing account.
The independent youth housing account is created in the state treasury. All revenue directed to the independent youth housing program must be deposited into this account. Moneys in the account may be spent only after appropriation. Expenditures from the account may only be used for the independent youth housing program as described in RCW 43.63A.305.

\[ [2007 c 316 § 7](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/2007-08/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/House/1922-S2.SL.pdf?cite=2007%20c%20316%20§%207); \]

## 43.63A.400 - Grants to public broadcast stations.
The *department of community, trade, and economic development shall distribute grants to eligible public radio and television broadcast stations under RCW 43.63A.410 and 43.63A.420 to assist with programming, operations, and capital needs.

\[ [1993 c 280 § 72](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/1993-94/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/Senate/5868-S.SL.pdf?cite=1993%20c%20280%20§%2072); [1987 c 308 § 2](http://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1987c308.pdf?cite=1987%20c%20308%20§%202); \]

## 43.63A.410 - Grants to broadcast stations eligible for grants from corporation for public broadcasting—Formula—Annual financial statements.
1. Eligibility for grants under this section shall be limited to broadcast stations which are:

   a. Licensed to Washington state organizations, nonprofit corporations, or other entities under section 73.621 of the regulations of the federal communications commission; and

   b. Qualified to receive community service grants from the federally chartered corporation for public broadcasting. Eligibility shall be established as of February 28th of each year.

2. The formula in this subsection shall be used to compute the amount of each eligible station's grant under this section.

   a. Appropriations under this section shall be divided into a radio fund, which shall be twenty-five percent of the total appropriation under this section, and a television fund, which shall be seventy-five percent of the total appropriation under this section. Each of the two funds shall be divided into a base grant pool, which shall be fifty percent of the fund, and an incentive grant pool, which shall be the remaining fifty percent of the fund.

   b. Each eligible participating public radio station shall receive an equal share of the radio base grant pool, plus a share of the radio incentive grant pool equal to the proportion its nonfederal financial support bears to the sum of all participating radio stations' nonfederal financial support as most recently reported to the corporation for public broadcasting.

   c. Each eligible participating public television station shall receive an equal share of the television base grant pool, plus a share of the television incentive grant pool equal to the proportion its nonfederal financial support bears to the sum of all participating television stations' nonfederal financial support as most recently reported to the corporation for public broadcasting.

3. Annual financial reports to the corporation for public broadcasting by eligible stations shall also be submitted by the stations to the *department of community, trade, and economic development.

\[ [1993 c 280 § 73](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/1993-94/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/Senate/5868-S.SL.pdf?cite=1993%20c%20280%20§%2073); [1987 c 308 § 3](http://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1987c308.pdf?cite=1987%20c%20308%20§%203); \]

## 43.63A.420 - Grants to other broadcast stations—Eligibility—Amounts.
1. Eligibility for grants under this section shall be limited to broadcast stations that:

   a. Have a noncommercial educational license granted by the federal communications commission;

   b. Are not eligible under RCW 43.63A.410;

   c. Have a permanent employee who is assigned operational management responsibility for the station and who is not compensated with moneys granted under this section;

   d. Meet the operating schedule requirements of the station's federal broadcast license;

   e. Have facilities and equipment that allow for program origination and production;

   f. Have a daily broadcast schedule devoted primarily to serving the educational, informational, and cultural needs of the community within its primary service area. The programming shall be intended for a general audience and not designed to further a particular religious philosophy or political organization;

   g. Originate a locally produced program service designed to serve the community;

   h. Maintain financial records in accordance with generally accepted accounting principles; and

   i. Complete an eligibility criteria statement and annual financial survey pursuant to rules adopted by the *department of community development.

2. [Empty]

   a. A grant of up to ten thousand dollars per year may be made under this section to those eligible stations operating at least twelve hours per day, three hundred sixty-five days each year, with transmitting facilities developed to the maximum combination of effective radiated power and antenna height possible under the station's federal communications commission license.

   b. A grant of up to eight thousand dollars per year may be made under this section to those eligible stations operating at least twelve hours per day, three hundred sixty-five days each year, with transmitting facilities not fully developed under federal communications commission rules.

   c. A grant of up to five thousand dollars per year may be made under this section to those eligible stations operating less than twelve hours per day, three hundred sixty-five days each year, with transmitting facilities developed to the maximum combination of effective radiated power and antenna height possible under the station's federal communications commission license.

   d. A grant of up to one thousand five hundred dollars per year may be made under this section to those eligible stations not meeting the requirements of (a), (b), or (c) of this subsection.

3. Funding received under this section is specifically for the support of public broadcast operations and facilities improvements which benefit the general community. No funds received under this section may be used for any other purposes by licensees of eligible stations.

4. Any portion of the appropriation not expended under this section shall be transferred for expenditure under RCW 43.63A.410.

\[ [1987 c 308 § 4](http://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1987c308.pdf?cite=1987%20c%20308%20§%204); \]

## 43.63A.470 - Manufactured housing—Inspections, investigations. (Contingent expiration date.)
1. The director or the director's authorized representative shall conduct such inspections and investigations as may be necessary to implement or enforce manufactured housing rules adopted under the authority of this chapter or to carry out the director's duties under this chapter.

2. For the purposes of enforcement of this chapter, persons duly designated by the director upon presenting appropriate credentials to the owner, operator, or agent in charge shall:

   a. At reasonable times and without advance notice enter any factory, warehouse, or establishment in which manufactured homes are manufactured, stored, or held for sale; and

   b. At reasonable times, within reasonable limits, and in a reasonable manner inspect any factory, warehouse, or establishment as required to comply with the standards adopted by the secretary of housing and urban development under the National Manufactured Housing Construction and Safety Standards Act of 1974 (800 Stat. 700; 42 U.S.C. Secs. 5401-5426). Each inspection shall be commenced and completed with reasonable promptness.

3. For the purpose of carrying out the provisions of this chapter, the director or the director's authorized representative is authorized:

   a. To require, by general or special orders, any factory, warehouse, or establishment in which manufactured homes are manufactured, to file, in such form as prescribed, reports or answers in writing to specific questions relating to any function of the department under this chapter. Such reports and answers shall be made under oath or otherwise, and shall be filed with the department within such reasonable time periods as prescribed by the department; and

   b. To hold such hearings, take such testimony, sit and act at such times and places, administer such oaths, and require, by subpoena or otherwise, the attendance and testimony of such witnesses and the production of such books, papers, correspondence, memorandums, contracts, agreements, or other records, as the director or such officer or employee deems advisable.

4. In carrying out the inspections authorized by this section the director shall establish by rule, under chapter 34.05 RCW, and impose on manufactured home manufacturers, distributors, and dealers such reasonable fees as may be necessary to offset the expenses incurred by the director in conducting the inspections, provided these fees are set in accordance with guidelines established by the United States secretary of housing and urban development.

\[ [1993 c 124 § 5](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/1993-94/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/Senate/5580.SL.pdf?cite=1993%20c%20124%20§%205); \]

## 43.63A.475 - Manufactured housing—Rules. (Contingent expiration date.)
The department shall adopt all rules under chapter 34.05 RCW necessary to implement chapter 124, Laws of 1993, giving due consideration to standards and regulations adopted by the secretary of housing and urban development under the National Manufactured Housing Construction and Safety Standards Act of 1974 (800 Stat. 700; 42 U.S.C. Secs. 5401-5426) for manufactured housing construction and safety standards.

\[ [1993 c 124 § 2](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/1993-94/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/Senate/5580.SL.pdf?cite=1993%20c%20124%20§%202); \]

## 43.63A.480 - Manufactured housing—Hearing procedures. (Contingent expiration date.)
The department shall adopt appropriate hearing procedures under chapter 34.05 RCW for the holding of formal and informal presentation of views, giving due consideration to hearing procedures adopted by the secretary of housing and urban development under the National Manufactured Housing Construction and Safety Standards Act of 1974 (800 Stat. 700; 42 U.S.C. Secs. 5401-5426).

\[ [1993 c 124 § 3](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/1993-94/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/Senate/5580.SL.pdf?cite=1993%20c%20124%20§%203); \]

## 43.63A.485 - Manufactured housing—Violations—Fines. (Contingent expiration date.)
1. A person who violates any of the provisions of the National Manufactured Housing Construction and Safety Standards Act of 1974 (800 Stat. 700; 42 U.S.C. Secs. 5401-5426) applicable to RCW 43.22A.030, 43.63A.470, 43.63A.475, and 43.63A.480 or any rules adopted under RCW 43.22A.030, 43.63A.470, 43.63A.475, and 43.63A.480 is liable to the state of Washington for a civil penalty of not to exceed one thousand dollars for each such violation. Each violation of the provisions of the National Manufactured Housing Construction and Safety Standards Act of 1974 (800 Stat. 700; 42 U.S.C. Secs. 5401-5426) applicable to RCW 43.22A.030, 43.63A.470, 43.63A.475, and 43.63A.480 or any rules adopted under RCW 43.22A.030, 43.63A.470, 43.63A.475, and 43.63A.480, shall constitute a separate violation with respect to each manufactured home or with respect to each failure or refusal to allow or perform an act required thereby, except that the maximum civil penalty may not exceed one million dollars for any related series of violations occurring within one year from the date of the first violation.

2. An individual or a director, officer, or agent of a corporation who knowingly and willfully violates any of the provisions of RCW 43.22A.030, 43.63A.470, 43.63A.475, and 43.63A.480 or any rules adopted under RCW 43.22A.030, 43.63A.470, 43.63A.475, and 43.63A.480, in a manner that threatens the health or safety of any purchaser, shall be fined not more than one thousand dollars or imprisoned up to three hundred sixty-four days, or both.

3. Any legal fees, court costs, expert witness fees, and staff costs expended by the state in successfully pursuing violators of RCW 43.22A.030, 43.63A.470, 43.63A.475, and 43.63A.480 shall be reimbursed in full by the violators.

\[ [2011 c 96 § 29](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/2011-12/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/Senate/5168-S.SL.pdf?cite=2011%20c%2096%20§%2029); [1993 c 124 § 4](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/1993-94/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/Senate/5580.SL.pdf?cite=1993%20c%20124%20§%204); \]

## 43.63A.490 - Manufactured housing—Contingent expiration date.
RCW * 43.63A.465 through 43.63A.490 shall expire and be of no force and effect on January 1 in any year following the failure of the United States department of housing and urban development to reimburse the state for the duties described in RCW * 43.63A.465 through 43.63A.490.

\[ [1993 c 124 § 6](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/1993-94/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/Senate/5580.SL.pdf?cite=1993%20c%20124%20§%206); \]

## 43.63A.500 - Farmworker housing construction manuals and plans.
The department shall develop, and make available to the public, model or prototype construction plans and manuals for several types of farmworker housing, including but not limited to seasonal housing for individuals and families, campgrounds, and recreational vehicle parks. Any person or organization intending to construct farmworker housing may adopt one or more of these models as the plan for the proposed housing.

\[ [1990 c 253 § 5](http://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1990c253.pdf?cite=1990%20c%20253%20§%205); \]

## 43.63A.505 - Agricultural employee housing—One-stop clearinghouse.
The department shall establish and administer a "one-stop clearinghouse" to coordinate state assistance for growers and nonprofit organizations in developing housing for agricultural employees. Growers, housing authorities, and nonprofit organizations shall have direct access to the one-stop clearinghouse. The department one-stop clearinghouse shall provide assistance on planning and design, building codes, temporary worker housing regulations, financing options, and management to growers and nonprofit organizations interested in farmworker construction. The department one-stop clearinghouse shall also provide educational materials and services to local government authorities on Washington state law concerning farmworker housing.

\[ [1999 c 164 § 202](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/1999-00/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/Senate/5594-S2.SL.pdf?cite=1999%20c%20164%20§%20202); \]

## 43.63A.510 - Affordable housing—Inventory of state-owned land.
1. The department must work with the designated agencies to identify, catalog, and recommend best use of under-utilized, state-owned land and property suitable for the development of affordable housing for very low-income, low-income or moderate-income households. The designated agencies must provide an inventory of real property that is owned or administered by each agency and is vacant or available for lease or sale. The department must work with the designated agencies to include in the inventories a consolidated list of any property transactions executed by the agencies under the authority of RCW 39.33.015, including the property appraisal, the terms and conditions of sale, lease, or transfer, the value of the public benefit, and the impact of transaction to the agency. The inventories with revisions must be provided to the department by November 1st of each year.

2. The department must consolidate inventories into two groups: Properties suitable for consideration in affordable housing development; and properties not suitable for consideration in affordable housing development. In making this determination, the department must use industry accepted standards such as: Location, approximate lot size, current land use designation, and current zoning classification of the property. The department shall provide a recommendation, based on this grouping, to the office of financial management and appropriate policy and fiscal committees of the legislature by December 1st of each year.

3. Upon written request, the department shall provide a copy of the inventory of state-owned and publicly owned lands and buildings to parties interested in developing the sites for affordable housing.

4. As used in this section:

   a. "Affordable housing" means residential housing that is rented or owned by a person who qualifies as a very low-income, low-income, or moderate-income household or who is from a special needs population, and whose monthly housing costs, including utilities other than telephone, do not exceed thirty percent of the household's monthly income.

   b. "Very low-income household" means a single person, family, or unrelated persons living together whose income is at or below fifty percent of the median income, adjusted for household size, for the county where the affordable housing is located.

   c. "Low-income household" means a single person, family, or unrelated persons living together whose income is more than fifty percent but is at or below eighty percent of the median income where the affordable housing is located.

   d. "Moderate-income household" means a single person, family, or unrelated persons living together whose income is more than eighty percent but is at or below one hundred fifteen percent of the median income where the affordable housing is located.

   e. "Affordable housing development" means state-owned real property appropriate for sale, transfer, or lease to an affordable housing developer capable of:

      i. Receiving the property within one hundred eighty days; and

      ii. Creating affordable housing units for occupancy within thirty-six months from the time of transfer.

   f. "Designated agencies" means the Washington state patrol, the state parks and recreation commission, and the departments of natural resources, social and health services, corrections, and enterprise services.

\[ [2018 c 217 § 1](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/2017-18/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/House/2382-S3.SL.pdf?cite=2018%20c%20217%20§%201); [1993 c 461 § 2](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/1993-94/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/House/1824.SL.pdf?cite=1993%20c%20461%20§%202); [1990 c 253 § 6](http://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1990c253.pdf?cite=1990%20c%20253%20§%206); \]

## 43.63A.550 - Growth management—Inventorying and collecting data.
1. The department shall assist in the process of inventorying and collecting data on public and private land for the acquisition of data describing land uses, demographics, infrastructure, critical areas, transportation corridors physical features, housing, and other information useful in managing growth throughout the state. For this purpose the department may contract with the consolidated technology services agency and shall form an advisory group consisting of representatives from state, local, and federal agencies, colleges and universities, and private firms with expertise in land planning, and geographic information systems.

2. The department shall establish a sequence for acquiring data, giving priority to rapidly growing areas. The data shall be retained in a manner to facilitate its use in preparing maps, aggregating with data from multiple jurisdictions, and comparing changes over time. Data shall further be retained in a manner which permits its access via computer.

3. The department shall work with other state agencies, local governments, and private organizations that are inventorying public and private lands to ensure close coordination and to ensure that duplication of efforts does not occur.

\[ [2011 1st sp.s. c 43 § 814](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/2011-12/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/Senate/5931-S.SL.pdf?cite=2011%201st%20sp.s.%20c%2043%20§%20814); [1998 c 245 § 71](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/1997-98/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/Senate/6219.SL.pdf?cite=1998%20c%20245%20§%2071); [1990 1st ex.s. c 17 § 21](http://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1990ex1c17.pdf?cite=1990%201st%20ex.s.%20c%2017%20§%2021); \]

## 43.63A.610 - Emergency mortgage assistance—Guidelines.
Emergency mortgage assistance shall be provided under the following general guidelines:

1. Loans provided under the program shall not exceed an amount equal to twenty-four months of mortgage payments.

2. The maximum loan amount allowed under the program shall not exceed twenty thousand dollars.

3. Loans shall be made to applicants who meet specific income guidelines established by the department.

4. Loan payments shall be made directly to the mortgage lender.

5. Loans shall be granted on a first-come, first-served basis.

6. Repayment of loans provided under the program shall be made to eligible local organizations, and must not take more than twenty years. Funds repaid to the program shall be used as grants or loans under the provisions of RCW * 43.63A.600 through 43.63A.640.

\[ [1994 c 114 § 2](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/1993-94/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/House/2275.SL.pdf?cite=1994%20c%20114%20§%202); [1991 c 315 § 24](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/1991-92/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/Senate/5555-S.SL.pdf?cite=1991%20c%20315%20§%2024); \]

## 43.63A.620 - Emergency rental assistance—Guidelines.
Emergency rental assistance shall be provided under the following general guidelines:

1. Rental assistance provided under the program may be in the form of loans or grants and shall not exceed an amount equal to twenty-four months of rental payments.

2. Rental assistance shall be made to applicants who meet specific income guidelines established by the department.

3. Rental payments shall be made directly to the landlord.

4. Rental assistance shall be granted on a first-come, first-served basis.

\[ [1994 c 114 § 3](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/1993-94/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/House/2275.SL.pdf?cite=1994%20c%20114%20§%203); [1991 c 315 § 25](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/1991-92/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/Senate/5555-S.SL.pdf?cite=1991%20c%20315%20§%2025); \]

## 43.63A.630 - Emergency mortgage and rental assistance program—Eligibility.
To be eligible for assistance under the program, an applicant must:

1. Be unable to keep mortgage or rental payments current, due to a loss of employment, and shall be at significant risk of eviction;

2. Have his or her permanent residence located in an eligible community;

3. If requesting emergency mortgage assistance, be the owner of an equitable interest in the permanent residence and intend to reside in the home being financed;

4. Be actively seeking new employment or be enrolled in a training program approved by the director; and

5. Submit an application for assistance to an organization eligible to receive funds under *RCW 43.63A.600.

\[ [1994 c 114 § 4](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/1993-94/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/House/2275.SL.pdf?cite=1994%20c%20114%20§%204); [1991 c 315 § 26](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/1991-92/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/Senate/5555-S.SL.pdf?cite=1991%20c%20315%20§%2026); \]

## 43.63A.640 - Emergency mortgage and rental assistance program—Duties—Interest rate, assignment, eligibility.
The department shall carry out the following duties:

1. Administer the program;

2. Identify organizations eligible to receive funds to implement the program;

3. Develop and adopt the necessary rules and procedures for implementation of the program and for dispersal [disbursal] of program funds to eligible organizations;

4. Establish the interest rate for repayment of loans at two percent below the market rate;

5. Work with lending institutions and social service providers in the eligible communities to assure that all eligible persons are informed about the program;

6. Utilize federal and state programs that complement or facilitate carrying out the program;

7. Ensure that local eligible organizations that dissolve or become ineligible assign their program funds, rights to loan repayments, and loan security instruments, to the government of the county in which the local organization is located. If the county government accepts the program assets described in this subsection, it shall act as a local eligible organization under the provisions of RCW * 43.63A.600 through 43.63A.640. If the county government declines to participate, the program assets shall revert to the department.

\[ [1994 c 114 § 5](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/1993-94/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/House/2275.SL.pdf?cite=1994%20c%20114%20§%205); [1991 c 315 § 27](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/1991-92/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/Senate/5555-S.SL.pdf?cite=1991%20c%20315%20§%2027); \]

## 43.63A.645 - Emergency housing programs—Rules.
The department shall, by rule, establish program standards, eligibility standards, eligibility criteria, and administrative rules for emergency housing programs and specify other benefits that may arise in consultation with providers.

\[ [1999 c 267 § 5](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/1999-00/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/House/1493-S2.SL.pdf?cite=1999%20c%20267%20§%205); \]

## 43.63A.650 - Housing—Department's responsibilities.
1. The department shall be the principal state department responsible for coordinating federal and state resources and activities in housing, except for programs administered by the Washington state housing finance commission under chapter 43.180 RCW, and for evaluating the operations and accomplishments of other state departments and agencies as they affect housing.

2. The department shall work with local governments, tribal organizations, local housing authorities, nonprofit community or neighborhood-based organizations, and regional or statewide nonprofit housing assistance organizations, for the purpose of coordinating federal and state resources with local resources for housing.

3. The department shall be the principal state department responsible for providing shelter and housing services to homeless families with children. The department shall have the principal responsibility to coordinate, plan, and oversee the state's activities for developing a coordinated and comprehensive plan to serve homeless families with children. The plan shall be developed collaboratively with the department of social and health services. The department shall include community organizations involved in the delivery of services to homeless families with children, and experts in the development and ongoing evaluation of the plan. The department shall follow professionally recognized standards and procedures. The plan shall be implemented within amounts appropriated by the legislature for that specific purpose in the operating and capital budgets. The department shall submit the plan to the appropriate committees of the senate and house of representatives no later than September 1, 1999, and shall update the plan and submit it to the appropriate committees of the legislature by January 1st of every odd-numbered year through 2007. The plan shall address at least the following: (a) The need for prevention assistance; (b) the need for emergency shelter; (c) the need for transitional assistance to aid families into permanent housing; (d) the need for linking services with shelter or housing; and (e) the need for ongoing monitoring of the efficiency and effectiveness of the plan's design and implementation.

\[ [1999 c 267 § 3](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/1999-00/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/House/1493-S2.SL.pdf?cite=1999%20c%20267%20§%203); [1993 c 478 § 13](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/1993-94/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/Senate/5584.SL.pdf?cite=1993%20c%20478%20§%2013); \]

## 43.63A.660 - Housing—Technical assistance and information, affordable housing.
The department shall provide technical assistance and information to state agencies and local governments to assist in the identification and removal of regulatory barriers to the development and placement of affordable housing. In providing assistance the department may:

1. Analyze the costs and benefits of state legislation, rules, and administrative actions and their impact on the development and placement of affordable housing;

2. Analyze the costs and benefits of local legislation, rules, and administrative actions and their impact on the development and placement of affordable housing;

3. Assist state agencies and local governments in determining the impact of existing and anticipated actions, legislation, and rules on the development and placement of affordable housing;

4. Investigate techniques and opportunities for reducing the life-cycle housing costs through regulatory reform;

5. Develop model standards and ordinances designed to reduce regulatory barriers to affordable housing and assisting in their adoption and use at the state and local government level;

6. Provide technical assistance and information to state agencies and local governments for implementation of legislative and administrative reform programs to remove barriers to affordable housing;

7. Prepare state regulatory barrier removal strategies;

8. Provide staffing to the affordable housing advisory board created in RCW 43.185B.020; and

9. Perform other activities as the director deems necessary to assist the state, local governments, and the housing industry in meeting the affordable housing needs of the state.

\[ [1993 c 478 § 14](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/1993-94/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/Senate/5584.SL.pdf?cite=1993%20c%20478%20§%2014); \]

## 43.63A.670 - Home-matching program—Finding, purpose.
1. The legislature finds that:

   a. The trend toward smaller household sizes will continue into the foreseeable future;

   b. Many of these households are in housing units that contain more bedrooms than occupants;

   c. There are older homeowners on relatively low, fixed income who are experiencing difficulties maintaining their homes; and

   d. There are single parents, recently widowed persons, people in the midst of divorce or separation, and persons with disabilities that are faced with displacement due to the high cost of housing.

2. The legislature declares that the purpose of RCW 43.63A.680 is to develop a pilot program designed to:

   a. Provide home-matching services that can enable people to continue living in their homes while promoting continuity of homeownership and community stability; and

   b. Counter the problem of displacement among people on relatively low, fixed incomes by linking people offering living space with people seeking housing.

\[ [2020 c 274 § 24](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/2019-20/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/House/2390.SL.pdf?cite=2020%20c%20274%20§%2024); [1993 c 478 § 18](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/1993-94/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/Senate/5584.SL.pdf?cite=1993%20c%20478%20§%2018); \]

## 43.63A.680 - Home-matching program—Pilot programs.
1. The department may develop and administer a home-matching program for the purpose of providing grants and technical assistance to eligible organizations to operate local home-matching programs. For purposes of this section, "eligible organizations" are those organizations eligible to receive assistance through the Washington housing trust fund, chapter 43.185 RCW.

2. The department may select up to five eligible organizations for the purpose of implementing a local home-matching program. The local home-matching programs are designed to facilitate: (a) Intergenerational homesharing involving older homeowners sharing homes with younger persons; (b) homesharing arrangements that involve an exchange of services such as cooking, housework, gardening, or babysitting for room and board or some financial consideration such as rent; and (c) the more efficient use of available housing.

3. In selecting local pilot programs under this section, the department shall consider:

   a. The eligible organization's ability, stability, and resources to implement the local home-matching program;

   b. The eligible organization's efforts to coordinate other support services needed by the individual or family participating in the local home-matching program; and

   c. Other factors the department deems appropriate.

4. The eligible organizations shall establish criteria for participation in the local home-matching program. The eligible organization shall make a determination of eligibility regarding the individuals' or families' participation in the local home-matching program. The determination shall include, but is not limited to a verification of the individual's or family's history of making rent payments in a consistent and timely manner.

\[ [1993 c 478 § 19](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/1993-94/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/Senate/5584.SL.pdf?cite=1993%20c%20478%20§%2019); \]

## 43.63A.690 - Minority and women-owned business enterprises—Linked deposit program.
1. The department shall provide technical assistance and loan packaging services that enable minority and women-owned business enterprises to obtain financing under the linked deposit program created under RCW 43.86A.060.

2. The department, in consultation with the office of minority and women's business enterprises, shall develop indicators to measure the performance of the linked deposit program in the areas of job creation or retention and providing access to capital to minority or women's business enterprises.

\[ [2005 c 302 § 6](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/2005-06/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/Senate/5782-S2.SL.pdf?cite=2005%20c%20302%20§%206); [2002 c 305 § 3](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/2001-02/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/House/2456-S.SL.pdf?cite=2002%20c%20305%20§%203); [1993 c 512 § 31](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/1993-94/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/House/1493-S.SL.pdf?cite=1993%20c%20512%20§%2031); \]

## 43.63A.720 - Prostitution prevention and intervention services—Grant program.
There is established in the *department of community, trade, and economic development a grant program to enhance funding for prostitution prevention and intervention services. Activities that can be funded through this grant program shall provide effective prostitution prevention and intervention services, such as counseling, parenting, housing relief, education, and vocational training, that:

1. Comprehensively address the problems of persons who are prostitutes; and

2. Enhance the ability of persons to leave or avoid prostitution.

\[ [1995 c 353 § 7](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/1995-96/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/House/1387-S.SL.pdf?cite=1995%20c%20353%20§%207); \]

## 43.63A.725 - Prostitution prevention and intervention grants—Eligibility.
1. Applications for funding under this chapter must:

   a. Meet the criteria in RCW 43.63A.720; and

   b. Contain evidence of active participation of the community and its commitment to providing effective prevention and intervention services for prostitutes through the participation of local governments, tribal governments, networks under chapter 70.190 RCW, human service and health organizations, and treatment entities and through meaningful involvement of others, including citizen groups.

2. Local governments, networks under chapter 70.190 RCW, nonprofit community groups, and nonprofit treatment providers including organizations that provide services, such as emergency housing, counseling, and crisis intervention shall, among others, be eligible for grants established under RCW 43.63A.720.

\[ [1995 c 353 § 8](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/1995-96/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/House/1387-S.SL.pdf?cite=1995%20c%20353%20§%208); \]

## 43.63A.730 - Prostitution prevention and intervention grants—Applications, contents.
At a minimum, grant applications must include the following:

1. The proposed geographic service area;

2. A description of the extent and effect of the needs for prostitution prevention and intervention within the relevant geographic area;

3. An explanation of how the funds will be used, their relationship to existing services available within the community, and the need that they will fulfill;

4. An explanation of what organizations were involved in the development of the proposal; and

5. The methods that will be employed to measure the success of the program.

\[ [1995 c 353 § 9](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/1995-96/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/House/1387-S.SL.pdf?cite=1995%20c%20353%20§%209); \]

## 43.63A.735 - Prostitution prevention and intervention grants—Award and use.
1. Subject to funds appropriated by the legislature, including funds in the prostitution prevention and intervention account, the *department of community, trade, and economic development shall make awards under the grant program established by RCW 43.63A.720.

2. Awards shall be made competitively based on the purposes of and criteria in RCW 43.63A.720 through 43.63A.730.

3. Activities funded under this section may be considered for funding in future years, but shall be considered under the same terms and criteria as new activities. Funding of a program or activity under this chapter shall not constitute an obligation by the state of Washington to provide ongoing funding.

4. The *department of community, trade, and economic development may receive such gifts, grants, and endowments from public or private sources as may be made from time to time, in trust or otherwise, for the use and benefit of the purposes of the grant program established under RCW 43.63A.720 and expend the same or any income from these sources according to the terms of the gifts, grants, or endowments.

5. The *department of community, trade, and economic development may expend up to five percent of the funds appropriated for the grant program for administrative costs and grant supervision.

\[ [1995 c 353 § 10](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/1995-96/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/House/1387-S.SL.pdf?cite=1995%20c%20353%20§%2010); \]

## 43.63A.740 - Prostitution prevention and intervention account.
The prostitution prevention and intervention account is created in the state treasury. Expenditures from the account may be used in the following order of priority:

1. Funding the statewide coordinating committee on sex trafficking;

2. Programs that provide mental health and substance abuse counseling, parenting skills training, housing relief, education, and vocational training for youth who have been diverted for a prostitution or prostitution loitering offense pursuant to RCW 13.40.213;

3. Funding for services provided to sexually exploited children as defined in RCW 13.32A.030 in secure and semi-secure crisis residential centers with access to staff trained to meet their specific needs;

4. Funding for services specified in RCW * 74.14B.060 and 74.14B.070 for sexually exploited children; and

5. Funding the grant program to enhance prostitution prevention and intervention services under RCW 43.63A.720.

\[ [2013 c 121 § 3](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/2013-14/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/House/1291-S.SL.pdf?cite=2013%20c%20121%20§%203); [2010 c 289 § 18](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/2009-10/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/Senate/6476-S.SL.pdf?cite=2010%20c%20289%20§%2018); [2009 c 387 § 2](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/2009-10/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/House/1362-S.SL.pdf?cite=2009%20c%20387%20§%202); [1995 c 353 § 11](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/1995-96/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/House/1387-S.SL.pdf?cite=1995%20c%20353%20§%2011); \]

## 43.63A.750 - Performing arts, art museums, cultural facilities—Competitive grant program for nonprofit organizations.
1. A competitive grant program to assist nonprofit organizations in acquiring, constructing, or rehabilitating performing arts, art museums, and cultural facilities is created.

2. [Empty]

   a. The department shall submit a list of recommended performing arts, art museum projects, and cultural organization projects eligible for funding to the governor and the legislature in the department's biennial capital budget request beginning with the 2001-2003 biennium and thereafter. The list, in priority order, shall include a description of each project, the amount of recommended state funding, and documentation of nonstate funds to be used for the project. The total amount of recommended state funding for projects on a biennial project list shall not exceed twelve million dollars, except that lists submitted during the 2019-2021 and 2021-2023 fiscal biennia may not exceed sixteen million dollars.

   b. The department shall establish a competitive process to prioritize applications for state assistance as follows:

      i. The department shall conduct a statewide solicitation of project applications from nonprofit organizations, local governments, and other entities, as determined by the department. The department shall evaluate and rank applications in consultation with a citizen advisory committee, including a representative from the state arts commission, using objective criteria. The evaluation and ranking process shall also consider local community support for projects and an examination of existing assets that applicants may apply to projects.

      ii. The department may establish the amount of state grant assistance for individual project applications but the amount shall not exceed twenty percent, or thirty-three and one-third percent for lists submitted during the 2019-2021 fiscal biennium, of the estimated total capital cost or actual cost of a project, whichever is less. The remaining portions of the project capital cost shall be a match from nonstate sources. The nonstate match may include cash, the value of real property when acquired solely for the purpose of the project, and in-kind contributions. The department is authorized to set matching requirements for individual projects. State assistance may be used to fund separate definable phases of a project if the project demonstrates adequate progress and has secured the necessary match funding.

      iii. The department shall not sign contracts or otherwise financially obligate funds under this section until the legislature has approved a specific list of projects. In contracts for grants authorized under this section, the department shall include provisions requiring that capital improvements be held by the grantee for a specified period of time appropriate to the amount of the grant and that facilities be used for the express purpose of the grant. If the grantee is found to be out of compliance with provisions of the contract, the grantee shall repay to the state general fund the principal amount of the grant plus interest calculated at the rate of interest on state of Washington general obligation bonds issued most closely to the date of authorization of the grant.

\[ [2021 c 332 § 7042](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/2021-22/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/House/1080-S.SL.pdf?cite=2021%20c%20332%20§%207042); [2020 c 356 § 7008](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/2019-20/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/Senate/6248-S.SL.pdf?cite=2020%20c%20356%20§%207008); [2006 c 371 § 235](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/2005-06/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/Senate/6384-S.SL.pdf?cite=2006%20c%20371%20§%20235); [2005 c 160 § 2](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/2005-06/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/House/1577-S.SL.pdf?cite=2005%20c%20160%20§%202); [1999 c 295 § 1](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/1999-00/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/House/1222-S.SL.pdf?cite=1999%20c%20295%20§%201); \]

## 43.63A.764 - Building communities fund program—Definitions.
The definitions in this section apply throughout RCW 43.63A.125, this section, and RCW 43.63A.766 and 43.63A.768 unless the context clearly requires otherwise.

1. "Department" means the *department of community, trade, and economic development.

2. "Distressed community" means: (a) A county that has an unemployment rate that is twenty percent above the state average for the immediately previous three years; (b) an area within a county that the department determines to be a low-income community, using as guidance the low-income community designations under the community development financial institutions fund's new markets tax credit program of the United States department of the treasury; or (c) a school district in which at least fifty percent of local elementary students receive free and reduced-price meals.

3. "Nonprofit organization" means an organization that is tax exempt, or not required to apply for an exemption, under section 501(c)(3) of the federal internal revenue code of 1986, as amended. 

4. "Technical assistance" means professional services provided under contract to nonprofit organizations for feasibility studies, planning, and project management related to acquiring, constructing, or rehabilitating nonresidential community services facilities.

\[ [2008 c 327 § 13](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/2007-08/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/Senate/6855-S2.SL.pdf?cite=2008%20c%20327%20§%2013); \]

## 43.63A.766 - Building communities fund account.
The building communities fund account is created in the state treasury. The account shall consist of legislative appropriations and gifts, grants, or endowments from other sources as permitted by law. Moneys in the account may be spent only after appropriation. Expenditures from the account may be used only for capital and technical assistance grants as provided in RCW 43.63A.125.

\[ [2008 c 327 § 14](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/2007-08/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/Senate/6855-S2.SL.pdf?cite=2008%20c%20327%20§%2014); \]

## 43.63A.768 - Building communities fund program—Accountability and reporting standards—Annual report.
1. The department shall develop accountability and reporting standards for grant recipients. At a minimum, the department shall use the criteria listed in RCW 43.63A.125(2)(b) to evaluate the progress of each grant recipient.

2. Beginning January 1, 2011, the department shall submit an annual report to the appropriate committees of the legislature, including:

   a. A list of projects currently under contract with the department under the building communities fund program; a description of each project, its total cost, the amount of state funding awarded and expended to date, the project status, the number of low-income people served, and the extent to which the project has met the criteria in RCW 43.63A.125(2)(b); and

   b. Recommendations, if any, for policy and programmatic changes to the building communities fund program to better achieve program objectives.

\[ [2008 c 327 § 16](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/2007-08/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/Senate/6855-S2.SL.pdf?cite=2008%20c%20327%20§%2016); \]

