# 43.24 - Department of licensing.
* [43.24.001 - Department of licensing—Creation—Director—Powers, duties, and functions—Personnel.](#4324001---department-of-licensingcreationdirectorpowers-duties-and-functionspersonnel)
* [43.24.005 - Director—Appointment—Salary.](#4324005---directorappointmentsalary)
* [43.24.016 - Powers and duties—Generally.](#4324016---powers-and-dutiesgenerally)
* [43.24.020 - Powers and duties—Licensing.](#4324020---powers-and-dutieslicensing)
* [43.24.023 - Rule-making authority.](#4324023---rule-making-authority)
* [43.24.030 - "License" defined.](#4324030---license-defined)
* [43.24.040 - Forms to be prescribed.](#4324040---forms-to-be-prescribed)
* [43.24.060 - Examinations—Committees—Duties, compensation, travel expenses.](#4324060---examinationscommitteesduties-compensation-travel-expenses)
* [43.24.065 - Appointment of temporary additional members of boards and committees for administration and grading of examinations.](#4324065---appointment-of-temporary-additional-members-of-boards-and-committees-for-administration-and-grading-of-examinations)
* [43.24.080 - Issuance of licenses.](#4324080---issuance-of-licenses)
* [43.24.084 - Professional licenses—Use of social security numbers and drivers' license numbers prohibited.](#4324084---professional-licensesuse-of-social-security-numbers-and-drivers-license-numbers-prohibited)
* [43.24.086 - Fee policy for professions, occupations, and businesses—Determination by rule.](#4324086---fee-policy-for-professions-occupations-and-businessesdetermination-by-rule)
* [43.24.090 - Examination of persons with disabilities.](#4324090---examination-of-persons-with-disabilities)
* [43.24.112 - Suspension of license—Noncompliance with support order—Reissuance.](#4324112---suspension-of-licensenoncompliance-with-support-orderreissuance)
* [43.24.115 - Director's duties as to refusal, revocation or suspension of licenses—Performance by assistants.](#4324115---directors-duties-as-to-refusal-revocation-or-suspension-of-licensesperformance-by-assistants)
* [43.24.120 - Appeal—Further review.](#4324120---appealfurther-review)
* [43.24.125 - Enforcement in accordance with RCW  43.05.100 and  43.05.110.](#4324125---enforcement-in-accordance-with-rcw--4305100-and--4305110)
* [43.24.130 - License moratorium for persons in service—Rules.](#4324130---license-moratorium-for-persons-in-servicerules)
* [43.24.140 - Extension or modification of licensing, certification, or registration period authorized—Rules and regulations, manner and content.](#4324140---extension-or-modification-of-licensing-certification-or-registration-period-authorizedrules-and-regulations-manner-and-content)
* [43.24.150 - Business and professions account.](#4324150---business-and-professions-account)
* [43.24.170 - Wage lien forms. (Effective January 1, 2022.)](#4324170---wage-lien-forms-effective-january-1-2022)
* [43.24.175 - Department of licensing wage lien account. (Effective January 1, 2022.)](#4324175---department-of-licensing-wage-lien-account-effective-january-1-2022)
## 43.24.001 - Department of licensing—Creation—Director—Powers, duties, and functions—Personnel.
See chapter 46.01 RCW.

\[ \]

## 43.24.005 - Director—Appointment—Salary.
The director of licensing shall be appointed by the governor with the consent of the senate and shall serve at the pleasure of the governor. The director shall receive a salary in an amount fixed by the governor in accordance with RCW 43.03.040.

\[ [1999 c 240 § 3](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/1999-00/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/House/2200.SL.pdf?cite=1999%20c%20240%20§%203); \]

## 43.24.016 - Powers and duties—Generally.
1. The director of licensing shall supervise and administer the activities of the department of licensing and shall advise the governor and the legislature with respect to matters under the jurisdiction of the department.

2. In addition to other powers and duties granted to the director, the director has the following powers and duties:

    a. Enter into contracts on behalf of the state to carry out the responsibilities of the department;

    b. Accept and expend gifts and grants, whether such grants be of federal or other funds;

    c. Appoint a deputy director and such assistant directors, special assistants, and administrators as may be needed to administer the department. These employees are exempt from the provisions of chapter 41.06 RCW;

    d. Adopt rules in accordance with chapter 34.05 RCW and perform all other functions necessary to carry out the responsibilities of the department;

    e. Delegate powers, duties, and functions as the director deems necessary for efficient administration, but the director is responsible for the official acts of the officers and employees of the department; and

    f. Perform other duties as are necessary and consistent with law.

3. The director may establish advisory groups as may be necessary to carry out the responsibilities of the department.

4. The internal affairs of the department shall be under the control of the director in order that the director may manage the department in a flexible and intelligent manner as dictated by changing contemporary circumstances. Unless specifically limited by law, the director shall have complete charge and supervisory powers over the department. The director may create such administrative structures as the director deems appropriate, except as otherwise specified by law, and the director may employ such personnel as may be necessary in accordance with chapter 41.06 RCW, except as otherwise provided by law.

\[ [1999 c 240 § 4](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/1999-00/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/House/2200.SL.pdf?cite=1999%20c%20240%20§%204); \]

## 43.24.020 - Powers and duties—Licensing.
In addition to other powers and duties granted to the department, the director of licensing shall administer all laws with respect to the examination of applicants for, and the issuance of, licenses to persons to engage in any business, profession, trade, occupation, or activity except for health professions.

\[ [1999 c 240 § 1](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/1999-00/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/House/2200.SL.pdf?cite=1999%20c%20240%20§%201); [1994 c 92 § 496](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/1993-94/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/House/2438-S.SL.pdf?cite=1994%20c%2092%20§%20496); [1989 1st ex.s. c 9 § 314](http://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1989ex1c9.pdf?cite=1989%201st%20ex.s.%20c%209%20§%20314); [1979 c 158 § 95](http://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1979c158.pdf?cite=1979%20c%20158%20§%2095); [1965 c 100 § 2](http://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1965c100.pdf?cite=1965%20c%20100%20§%202); [1965 c 8 § 43.24.020](http://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1965c8.pdf?cite=1965%20c%208%20§%2043.24.020); [1921 c 7 § 96](http://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1921c7.pdf?cite=1921%20c%207%20§%2096); RRS § 10854.   1921 c 7 § 104; RRS § 10862. (iii)  1929 c 133 § 1; RRS § 5852-24; \]

## 43.24.023 - Rule-making authority.
For rules adopted after July 23, 1995, the director of the department of licensing may not rely solely on a section of law stating a statute's intent or purpose, on the enabling provisions of the statute establishing the agency, or on any combination of such provisions, for statutory authority to adopt any rule, except rules defining or clarifying terms in, or procedures necessary to the implementation of, a statute.

\[ [1995 c 403 § 107](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/1995-96/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/House/1010-S.SL.pdf?cite=1995%20c%20403%20§%20107); \]

## 43.24.030 - "License" defined.
The word "license" shall be construed to mean and include license, certificate of registration, certificate of qualification, certificate of competency, certificate of authority, and any other instrument, by whatever name designated, authorizing the practice of a profession or calling, the carrying on of a business or occupation, or the doing of any act required by law to be authorized by the state.

\[ [1965 c 8 § 43.24.030](http://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1965c8.pdf?cite=1965%20c%208%20§%2043.24.030); [1921 c 7 § 98](http://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1921c7.pdf?cite=1921%20c%207%20§%2098); RRS § 10856; \]

## 43.24.040 - Forms to be prescribed.
The director of licensing shall prescribe the various forms of applications, certificates, and licenses required by law.

\[ [1979 c 158 § 97](http://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1979c158.pdf?cite=1979%20c%20158%20§%2097); [1965 c 8 § 43.24.040](http://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1965c8.pdf?cite=1965%20c%208%20§%2043.24.040); [1921 c 7 § 97](http://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1921c7.pdf?cite=1921%20c%207%20§%2097); RRS § 10855; \]

## 43.24.060 - Examinations—Committees—Duties, compensation, travel expenses.
1. The director of licensing shall, from time to time, fix such times and places for holding examinations of applicants as may be convenient, and adopt general rules and regulations prescribing the method of conducting examinations.

The governor, from time to time, upon the request of the director of licensing, shall appoint examining committees, composed of three persons possessing the qualifications provided by law to conduct examinations of applicants for licenses to practice the respective professions or callings for which licenses are required.

The committees shall prepare the necessary lists of examination questions, conduct the examinations, which may be either oral or written, or partly oral and partly written, and shall make and file with the director of licensing lists, signed by all the members conducting the examination, showing the names and addresses of all applicants for licenses who have successfully passed the examination, and showing separately the names and addresses of the applicants who have failed to pass the examination, together with all examination questions and the written answers thereto submitted by the applicants.

Each member of a committee shall receive twenty-five dollars per day for each day spent in conducting the examination and in going to and returning from the place of examination, and travel expenses, in accordance with RCW 43.03.050 and 43.03.060.

2. The director of licensing may appoint advisory committees to advise the department regarding the preparation of examinations for professional licensing and such other specific aspects of regulating the professions within the jurisdiction of the department as the director may designate. Such a committee and its members shall serve at the pleasure of the director.

Each member of an advisory committee shall be compensated in accordance with RCW 43.03.240 and shall receive reimbursement for travel expenses incurred in attending meetings of the committee in accordance with RCW 43.03.050 and 43.03.060.

\[ [1984 c 287 § 78](http://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1984c287.pdf?cite=1984%20c%20287%20§%2078); [1982 c 227 § 15](http://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1982c227.pdf?cite=1982%20c%20227%20§%2015); [1979 c 158 § 98](http://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1979c158.pdf?cite=1979%20c%20158%20§%2098); 1975-'76 2nd ex.s. c 34 § 105; [1965 c 100 § 3](http://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1965c100.pdf?cite=1965%20c%20100%20§%203); [1965 c 8 § 43.24.060](http://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1965c8.pdf?cite=1965%20c%208%20§%2043.24.060); [1921 c 7 § 99](http://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1921c7.pdf?cite=1921%20c%207%20§%2099); RRS § 10857; \]

## 43.24.065 - Appointment of temporary additional members of boards and committees for administration and grading of examinations.
The director of licensing may, at the request of a board or committee established under Title 18 RCW under the administrative authority of the department of licensing, appoint temporary additional members for the purpose of participating as members during the administration and grading of practical examinations for licensure, certification, or registration. The appointment shall be for the duration of the examination specified in the request. Individuals so appointed must meet the same minimum qualifications as regular members of the board or committee, including the requirement to be licensed, certified, or registered. While serving as board or committee members, persons so appointed have all the powers, duties, and immunities and are entitled to the emoluments, including travel expenses in accordance with RCW 43.03.050 and 43.03.060, of regular members of the board or committee. This authority is intended to provide for more efficient, economical, and effective examinations.

\[ [1985 c 116 § 1](http://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1985c116.pdf?cite=1985%20c%20116%20§%201); \]

## 43.24.080 - Issuance of licenses.
Except as provided in RCW 43.24.112, at the close of each examination the department of licensing shall prepare the proper licenses, where no further fee is required to be paid, and issue licenses to the successful applicants signed by the director and notify all successful applicants, where a further fee is required, of the fact that they are entitled to receive such license upon the payment of such further fee to the department of licensing and notify all applicants who have failed to pass the examination of that fact.

\[ [1997 c 58 § 866](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/1997-98/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/House/3901.SL.pdf?cite=1997%20c%2058%20§%20866); [1979 c 158 § 99](http://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1979c158.pdf?cite=1979%20c%20158%20§%2099); [1965 c 100 § 4](http://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1965c100.pdf?cite=1965%20c%20100%20§%204); [1965 c 8 § 43.24.080](http://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1965c8.pdf?cite=1965%20c%208%20§%2043.24.080); [1921 c 7 § 101](http://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1921c7.pdf?cite=1921%20c%207%20§%20101); RRS § 10859; \]

## 43.24.084 - Professional licenses—Use of social security numbers and drivers' license numbers prohibited.
Social security numbers and drivers' license numbers may not be used as part of a professional license. Professional licenses containing such information that are in existence on January 1, 2002, shall comply with this section by the next renewal date.

\[ [2001 c 276 § 1](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/2001-02/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/House/1899-S.SL.pdf?cite=2001%20c%20276%20§%201); \]

## 43.24.086 - Fee policy for professions, occupations, and businesses—Determination by rule.
It shall be the policy of the state of Washington that the cost of each professional, occupational[,] or business licensing program be fully borne by the members of that profession, occupation[,] or business. The director of licensing shall from time to time establish the amount of all application fees, license fees, registration fees, examination fees, permit fees, renewal fees, and any other fee associated with licensing or regulation of professions, occupations[,] or businesses, except for health professions, administered by the department of licensing. In fixing said fees, the director shall set the fees for each such program at a sufficient level to defray the costs of administering that program. All such fees shall be fixed by rule adopted by the director in accordance with the provisions of the administrative procedure act, chapter 34.05 RCW.

\[ [1999 c 240 § 2](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/1999-00/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/House/2200.SL.pdf?cite=1999%20c%20240%20§%202); [1989 1st ex.s. c 9 § 315](http://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1989ex1c9.pdf?cite=1989%201st%20ex.s.%20c%209%20§%20315); [1987 c 467 § 7](http://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1987c467.pdf?cite=1987%20c%20467%20§%207); [1983 c 168 § 12](http://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1983c168.pdf?cite=1983%20c%20168%20§%2012); \]

## 43.24.090 - Examination of persons with disabilities.
Any person taking any written examination prescribed or authorized by law, for a license or permit to practice any trade, occupation, or profession, who, because of any disability, is unable to write the examination himself or herself, may dictate it to and have it written or typed by another, to the same effect as though the examination were written out by himself or herself. Any expense connected therewith shall be borne by the person taking the examination.

\[ [2020 c 274 § 22](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/2019-20/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/House/2390.SL.pdf?cite=2020%20c%20274%20§%2022); [2009 c 549 § 5109](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/2009-10/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/Senate/5038.SL.pdf?cite=2009%20c%20549%20§%205109); [1965 c 8 § 43.24.090](http://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1965c8.pdf?cite=1965%20c%208%20§%2043.24.090); [1947 c 143 § 1](http://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1947c143.pdf?cite=1947%20c%20143%20§%201); Rem. Supp. 1947 § 8265-20; \]

## 43.24.112 - Suspension of license—Noncompliance with support order—Reissuance.
The department shall immediately suspend any license issued by the department of licensing of a person who has been certified pursuant to RCW 74.20A.320 by the department of social and health services as a person who is not in compliance with a support order or a *residential or visitation order. If the person has continued to meet all other requirements for reinstatement during the suspension, reissuance of the license shall be automatic upon the department's receipt of a release issued by the department of social and health services stating that the licensee is in compliance with the order.

\[ [1997 c 58 § 869](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/1997-98/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/House/3901.SL.pdf?cite=1997%20c%2058%20§%20869); \]

## 43.24.115 - Director's duties as to refusal, revocation or suspension of licenses—Performance by assistants.
The director may deputize one or more of his or her assistants to perform his or her duties with reference to refusal, revocation or suspension of licenses, including the power to preside at hearings and to render decisions therein subject to the approval of the director.

\[ [2009 c 549 § 5110](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/2009-10/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/Senate/5038.SL.pdf?cite=2009%20c%20549%20§%205110); [1965 c 100 § 6](http://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1965c100.pdf?cite=1965%20c%20100%20§%206); \]

## 43.24.120 - Appeal—Further review.
Except as provided in RCW 43.24.112, any person feeling aggrieved by the refusal of the director to issue a license, or to renew one, or by the revocation or suspension of a license shall have a right of appeal to superior court from the decision of the director of licensing, which shall be taken, prosecuted, heard, and determined in the manner provided in chapter 34.05 RCW.

The decision of the superior court may be reviewed by the supreme court or the court of appeals in the same manner as other civil cases.

\[ [1997 c 58 § 868](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/1997-98/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/House/3901.SL.pdf?cite=1997%20c%2058%20§%20868); [1987 c 202 § 212](http://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1987c202.pdf?cite=1987%20c%20202%20§%20212); [1979 c 158 § 102](http://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1979c158.pdf?cite=1979%20c%20158%20§%20102); [1971 c 81 § 112](http://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1971c81.pdf?cite=1971%20c%2081%20§%20112); [1965 c 8 § 43.24.120](http://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1965c8.pdf?cite=1965%20c%208%20§%2043.24.120); [1921 c 7 § 106](http://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1921c7.pdf?cite=1921%20c%207%20§%20106); RRS § 10864; \]

## 43.24.125 - Enforcement in accordance with RCW  43.05.100 and  43.05.110.
Enforcement action taken after July 23, 1995, by the director or the department of licensing shall be in accordance with RCW 43.05.100 and 43.05.110.

\[ [1995 c 403 § 624](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/1995-96/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/House/1010-S.SL.pdf?cite=1995%20c%20403%20§%20624); \]

## 43.24.130 - License moratorium for persons in service—Rules.
1. Notwithstanding any provision of law to the contrary, the license of any person licensed by the director of licensing, or the boards and commissions listed in chapter 18.235 RCW, to practice a profession or engage in an occupation, if valid and in force and effect at the time the licensee entered service in the armed forces, the United States public health service commissioned corps, or the merchant marine of the United States, shall continue in full force and effect so long as such service continues, unless sooner suspended, canceled, or revoked for cause as provided by law. The director, board, or commission shall renew the license of every such person who applies for renewal thereof within six months after being honorably discharged from service upon payment of the renewal fee applicable to the then current year or other license period.

2. If requested by the licensee, the license of a spouse or registered domestic partner of a servicemember in the United States armed forces, including the United States public health service commissioned corps, if valid and in force and effect at the time the servicemember is deployed or stationed in a location outside Washington state, must be placed in inactive military spouse or registered domestic partner status so long as such service continues, unless sooner suspended, canceled, or revoked for cause as provided by law. The director, board, or commission shall return to active status the license of every such person who applies for activation within six months after returning to Washington state, upon payment of the current renewal fee and meeting the current renewal conditions of the respective license.

3. The director, board, or commission may adopt any rules necessary to implement this section.

\[ [2012 c 45 § 1](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/2011-12/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/Senate/6290.SL.pdf?cite=2012%20c%2045%20§%201); [1979 c 158 § 103](http://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1979c158.pdf?cite=1979%20c%20158%20§%20103); [1965 c 8 § 43.24.130](http://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1965c8.pdf?cite=1965%20c%208%20§%2043.24.130); [1945 c 112 § 1](http://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1945c112.pdf?cite=1945%20c%20112%20§%201); [1943 c 108 § 1](http://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1943c108.pdf?cite=1943%20c%20108%20§%201); RRS § 10864-1; \]

## 43.24.140 - Extension or modification of licensing, certification, or registration period authorized—Rules and regulations, manner and content.
Notwithstanding any provision of law to the contrary which provides for a licensing period for any type of license subject to this chapter, the director of licensing may, from time to time, extend or otherwise modify the duration of any licensing, certification, or registration period, whether an initial or renewal period, if the director determines that it would result in a more economical or efficient operation of state government and that the public health, safety, or welfare would not be substantially adversely affected thereby. However, no license, certification, or registration may be issued or approved for a period in excess of four years, without renewal. Such extension, reduction, or other modification of a licensing, certification, or registration period shall be by rule or regulation of the department of licensing adopted in accordance with the provisions of chapter 34.05 RCW. Such rules and regulations may provide a method for imposing and collecting such additional proportional fee as may be required for the extended or modified period.

\[ [1984 c 279 § 25](http://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1984c279.pdf?cite=1984%20c%20279%20§%2025); [1979 c 158 § 104](http://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1979c158.pdf?cite=1979%20c%20158%20§%20104); [1971 c 52 § 1](http://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1971c52.pdf?cite=1971%20c%2052%20§%201); \]

## 43.24.150 - Business and professions account.
1. The business and professions account is created in the state treasury. All receipts from business or professional licenses, registrations, certifications, renewals, examinations, or civil penalties assessed and collected by the department from the following chapters must be deposited into the account:

    a. Chapter 18.11 RCW, auctioneers;

    b. Chapter 18.16 RCW, cosmetologists, barbers, and manicurists;

    c. Chapter 18.145 RCW, court reporters;

    d. Chapter 18.165 RCW, private investigators;

    e. Chapter 18.170 RCW, security guards;

    f. Chapter 18.185 RCW, bail bond agents;

    g. Chapter 18.280 RCW, home inspectors;

    h. Chapter 19.16 RCW, collection agencies;

    i. Chapter 19.31 RCW, employment agencies;

    j. Chapter 19.105 RCW, camping resorts;

    k. Chapter 19.138 RCW, sellers of travel;

    l. Chapter 42.45 RCW, notaries public;

    m. Chapter 64.36 RCW, timeshares;

    n. Chapter 67.08 RCW, boxing, martial arts, and wrestling;

    o. Chapter 18.300 RCW, body art, body piercing, and tattooing;

    p. Chapter 79A.60 RCW, whitewater river outfitters;

    q. Chapter 19.158 RCW, commercial telephone solicitation; and

    r. Chapter 19.290 RCW, scrap metal businesses.

Moneys in the account may be spent only after appropriation. Expenditures from the account may be used only for expenses incurred in carrying out these business and professions licensing activities of the department. Any residue in the account must be accumulated and may not revert to the general fund at the end of the biennium. However, during the 2013-2015 fiscal biennium the legislature may transfer to the state general fund such amounts as reflect the excess fund balance in the account.

2. The director must biennially prepare a budget request based on the anticipated costs of administering the business and professions licensing activities listed in subsection (1) of this section, which must include the estimated income from these business and professions fees.

\[ [2017 c 281 § 40](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/2017-18/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/Senate/5081-S.SL.pdf?cite=2017%20c%20281%20§%2040); [2013 2nd sp.s. c 4 § 978](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/2013-14/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/Senate/5034-S.SL.pdf?cite=2013%202nd%20sp.s.%20c%204%20§%20978); [2013 2nd sp.s. c 4 § 977](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/2013-14/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/Senate/5034-S.SL.pdf?cite=2013%202nd%20sp.s.%20c%204%20§%20977); [2013 c 322 § 30](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/2013-14/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/House/1552-S.SL.pdf?cite=2013%20c%20322%20§%2030); [2011 c 298 § 25](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/2011-12/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/House/2017-S.SL.pdf?cite=2011%20c%20298%20§%2025); [2009 c 429 § 4](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/2009-10/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/Senate/6126.SL.pdf?cite=2009%20c%20429%20§%204); [2009 c 412 § 21](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/2009-10/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/Senate/5391-S.SL.pdf?cite=2009%20c%20412%20§%2021); [2009 c 370 § 19](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/2009-10/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/Senate/5273-S.SL.pdf?cite=2009%20c%20370%20§%2019); [2008 c 119 § 22](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/2007-08/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/Senate/6606-S.SL.pdf?cite=2008%20c%20119%20§%2022); [2005 c 25 § 1](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/2005-06/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/House/1394-S.SL.pdf?cite=2005%20c%2025%20§%201); \]

## 43.24.170 - Wage lien forms. (Effective January 1, 2022.)
For the purposes of implementing the notice and filing provisions under RCW 60.90.030(2)(a) and 60.90.090 that are applicable to the department of licensing, the department of licensing may, by rule, create wage lien forms specific to the department of licensing, so long as the forms include the information described in those sections.

\[ [2021 c 102 § 19](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/2021-22/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/Senate/5355-S.SL.pdf?cite=2021%20c%20102%20§%2019); \]

## 43.24.175 - Department of licensing wage lien account. (Effective January 1, 2022.)
The department of licensing wage lien account is created in the state treasury. All receipts from wage lien filing fees collected by the department of licensing must be deposited in the account. Moneys in the account may be spent only after appropriation. Expenditures from the account may be used only to administer wage lien filings in RCW 60.90.030.

\[ [2021 c 102 § 20](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/2021-22/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/Senate/5355-S.SL.pdf?cite=2021%20c%20102%20§%2020); \]


## **43.24.XXX - TBD**
**
For the purposes of implementing the notice and filing provisions under sections 4(2)(a) and 10 of this act that are applicable to the department of licensing, the department of licensing may, by rule, create wage lien forms specific to the department of licensing, so long as the forms include the information described in those sections.


[ 2021 c XXX § 19; ]**

## **43.24.XXX - TBD**
**
The department of licensing wage lien account is created in the state treasury. All receipts from wage lien filing fees collected by the department of licensing must be deposited in the account. Moneys in the account may be spent only after appropriation. Expenditures from the account may be used only to administer wage lien filings in section 4 of this act.


[ 2021 c XXX § 20; ]**

## **43.24.XXX - TBD**
**
For the purposes of implementing the notice and filing provisions under sections 4(2)(a) and 10 of this act that are applicable to the department of licensing, the department of licensing may, by rule, create wage lien forms specific to the department of licensing, so long as the forms include the information described in those sections.


[ 2021 c XXX § 19; ]**

## **43.24.XXX - TBD**
**
The department of licensing wage lien account is created in the state treasury. All receipts from wage lien filing fees collected by the department of licensing must be deposited in the account. Moneys in the account may be spent only after appropriation. Expenditures from the account may be used only to administer wage lien filings in section 4 of this act.


[ 2021 c XXX § 20; ]**
