[wa-law.org](/) > [bill](/bill/) > [2025-26](/bill/2025-26/) > [HB 1339](/bill/2025-26/hb/1339/) > [Substitute Bill](/bill/2025-26/hb/1339/S/)

# HB 1339 - Even-numbered year elections

[Source](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/2025-26/Pdf/Bills/House%20Bills/1339-S.pdf)

## Section 1
The legislature finds that participation in local government elections is integral to ensuring that local governments and elected officials accurately represent and are accountable to the communities which they serve. The legislature believes that when there is low voter participation in an election, policy outcomes are more favorable to special interests and less reflective of the needs of the broader community. Over the past eight years, Washington has had a dramatic gap between odd-year and even-year voter participation: Participation in local elections in odd-numbered years averages around 40.5 percent, while even-numbered year elections average around 80 percent participation, nearly double that of odd-year elections.

Under current law, local governments generally must conduct elections in odd-numbered years that do not coincide with federal or state elections. The legislature believes that holding local government elections in even-numbered years will increase voter turnout and ensure that a broader cross-section of voters participate in contests for local offices, resulting in local governments that more accurately represent and reflect the desires and needs of their communities. In particular, an increase in voter turnout will ensure that the voices of younger voters, working and low-income families, and people with disabilities are heard. Therefore, to increase voter participation in local elections, the legislature intends to provide local governments the option to conduct local elections in even-numbered years.

## Section 2
1. All city, town, and district general elections shall be held throughout the state of Washington on the first Tuesday following the first Monday in November in the odd-numbered years, except as provided in subsection (6) of this section.

This section shall not apply to:

    a. Elections for the recall of any elective public officer;

    b. Public utility districts, conservation districts, or district elections at which the ownership of property within those districts is a prerequisite to voting, all of which elections shall be held at the times prescribed in the laws specifically applicable thereto;

    c. Consolidation proposals as provided for in RCW 28A.315.235 and nonhigh capital fund aid proposals as provided for in chapter 28A.540 RCW; and

    d. Special flood control districts consisting of three or more counties.

2. The county auditor, as ex officio supervisor of elections, upon request in the form of a resolution of the governing body of a city, town, or district, presented to the auditor prior to the proposed election date, shall call a special election in such city, town, or district, and for the purpose of such special election he or she may combine, unite, or divide precincts. Such a special election shall be held on one of the following dates as decided by the governing body:

    a. The second Tuesday in February;

    b. The fourth Tuesday in April;

    c. The day of the primary election as specified by RCW 29A.04.311; or

    d. The first Tuesday after the first Monday in November.

3. A resolution calling for a special election on a date set forth in subsection (2)(a) and (b) of this section must be presented to the county auditor at least sixty days prior to the election date. A resolution calling for a special election on a date set forth in subsection (2)(c) of this section must be presented to the county auditor no later than the Friday immediately before the first day of regular candidate filing. A resolution calling for a special election on a date set forth in subsection (2)(d) of this section must be presented to the county auditor no later than the day of the primary.

4. In addition to subsection (2)(a) through (d) of this section, a special election to validate an excess levy or bond issue may be called at any time to meet the needs resulting from fire, flood, earthquake, or other act of God, except that no special election may be held between the first day for candidates to file for public office and the last day to certify the returns of the general election other than as provided in subsection (2)(c) and (d) of this section. Such special election shall be conducted and notice thereof given in the manner provided by law.

5. This section shall supersede the provisions of any and all other statutes, whether general or special in nature, having different dates for such city, town, and district elections, the purpose of this section being to establish mandatory dates for holding elections, with the exception of subsection (6) of this section.

6. A city, town, or special purpose district that holds its elections under this title may choose to hold its regular elections in even-numbered years by: Providing notice to the county or counties in which it is located following adoption of an ordinance or policy; approval by the voters of an ordinance or charter amendment referred by its legislative body; or, in jurisdictions in which citizens may propose an initiative or charter amendment under RCW 35.22.220, 35A.11.080, or 35A.09.020, approval by the voters of an initiative or charter amendment proposed by the voters.

    a. A city, town, or special purpose district moving its regular elections to even-numbered years through adoption of an ordinance or policy by its legislative body must hold two public hearings not less than 30 days apart to consider public input. A vote on final adoption of the ordinance or policy may be taken only after at least 30 days have elapsed since the date on which the second of the two public hearings was held.

    b. A city, town, or special purpose district moving its regular elections to even-numbered years must transition from odd-numbered to even-numbered years by electing each position to one term that is either one year shorter or one year longer in duration than provided by law. The length of the transitional term must be specified in the ordinance, policy, initiative, or charter amendment that proposes the transition. After conclusion of that term, beginning in an even-numbered year, elections for positions must be for their prescribed term lengths. For special purpose districts, this subsection shall supersede any conflicting provisions regarding term lengths in statutes governing the district.

    c. A city, town, or special purpose district that chooses to hold its elections in even-numbered years must do so for all elected positions in the jurisdiction.

    d. If a city, town, or special purpose district repeals an ordinance, charter amendment, or policy that moved its elections to even-numbered years, the jurisdiction shall transition back to odd-numbered year elections by electing each position to one term that is one year shorter in duration than provided by law. After conclusion of that term, beginning in an odd-numbered year, elections for positions must be for their prescribed term lengths.

    e. An ordinance, charter amendment, or policy must be adopted by January 15th of an odd-numbered year for the city, town, or special purpose district to begin transition under (b) of this subsection in that calendar year.

## Section 3
1. All regular elections in cities organized under the statutory commission form of government shall be held quadrennially in the odd-numbered years on the dates provided in RCW 29A.04.330, except for cities that are moving or have moved their regular elections to even-numbered years under RCW 29A.04.330.

2. The commissioners shall be nominated and elected at large. Their terms shall be for four years, unless the city is transitioning its regular elections to even-numbered years as provided by RCW 29A.04.330, and until their successors are elected and qualified and assume office in accordance with RCW 29A.60.280. However, at the next regular election of a city organized under a statutory commission form of government, the terms of office of commissioners shall occur with the person who is elected as a commissioner receiving the least number of votes being elected to a two-year term of office and the other two persons who are elected being elected to four-year terms of office. Thereafter, commissioners shall be elected to four-year terms of office.

3. Vacancies on a commission shall occur and shall be filled as provided in chapter 42.12 RCW.

## Section 4
If the majority of the votes cast at a special election for organization on the council-manager plan favor the plan, the city or town shall elect the council required under the council-manager plan in number according to its population at the next municipal general election. However, special elections shall be held to nominate and elect the new city councilmembers at the next primary and general election held in an even-numbered year if the next municipal general election is more than one year after the date of the election at which the voters approved the council-manager plan, unless the city or town is moving or has moved its regularly scheduled elections to even-numbered years as provided by RCW 29A.04.330, in which case it shall hold regular elections rather than special elections. The staggering of terms of office shall occur at the election when the new councilmembers are elected, where the simple majority of the persons elected as councilmembers receiving the greatest numbers of votes shall be elected to four-year terms of office if the election is held in an odd-numbered year, or three-year terms of office if the election is a special election held in an even-numbered year, and the remainder of the persons elected as councilmembers shall be elected to two-year terms of office if the election is held in an odd-numbered year, or one-year terms of office if the election is a special election held in an even-numbered year. The initial councilmembers shall take office immediately when they are elected and qualified, but the lengths of their terms of office shall be calculated from the first day in January in the year following the election.

## Section 5
General municipal elections in second‑class cities shall be held biennially in the odd-numbered years and shall be subject to general election law, unless a second-class city is moving or has moved its general municipal elections to even-numbered years under the process provided for in RCW 29A.04.330.

The terms of office of the mayor, city attorney, clerk, and treasurer shall be four years and until their successors are elected and qualified and assume office in accordance with RCW 29A.60.280, unless the second-class city is transitioning its general municipal elections to even-numbered years as provided by RCW 29A.04.330: PROVIDED, That if the offices of city attorney, clerk, and treasurer are made appointive, the city attorney, clerk, and treasurer shall not be appointed for a definite term: PROVIDED FURTHER, That the term of the elected treasurer shall not commence in the same biennium in which the term of the mayor commences, nor in which the terms of the city attorney and clerk commence if they are elected.

Council positions shall be numbered in each second‑class city so that council position seven has a two-year term of office and council positions one through six shall each have four-year terms of office. Each councilmember shall remain in office until a successor is elected and qualified and assumes office in accordance with RCW 29A.60.280.

In its discretion the council of a second‑class city may divide the city by ordinance, into a convenient number of wards, not exceeding six, fix the boundaries of the wards, and change the ward boundaries from time to time and as provided in RCW 29A.76.010. No change in the boundaries of any ward shall be made within one hundred twenty days next before the date of a general municipal election, nor within twenty months after the wards have been established or altered unless pursuant to RCW 29A.92.040 or 29A.92.110. However, if a boundary change results in one ward being represented by more councilmembers than the number to which it is entitled, those having the shortest unexpired terms shall be assigned by the council to wards where there is a vacancy, and the councilmembers so assigned shall be deemed to be residents of the wards to which they are assigned for purposes of determining whether those positions are vacant.

Whenever such city is so divided into wards, the city council shall designate by ordinance the number of councilmembers to be elected from each ward, apportioning the same in proportion to the population of the wards. Thereafter the councilmembers so designated shall be elected by the voters resident in such ward, or by general vote of the whole city as may be designated in such ordinance. Council position seven shall not be associated with a ward and the person elected to that position may reside anywhere in the city and voters throughout the city may vote at a primary to nominate candidates for position seven, when a primary is necessary, and at a general election to elect the person to council position seven. Additional territory that is added to the city shall, by act of the council, be annexed to contiguous wards without affecting the right to redistrict at the expiration of twenty months after last previous division. The removal of a councilmember from the ward for which he or she was elected shall create a vacancy in such office.

Wards shall be redrawn as provided in chapter 29A.76 RCW. Wards shall be used as follows: (1) Only a resident of the ward may be a candidate for, or hold office as, a councilmember of the ward; and (2) only voters of the ward may vote at a primary to nominate candidates for a councilmember of the ward. Voters of the entire city may vote at the general election to elect a councilmember of a ward, unless the city had prior to January 1, 1994, limited the voting in the general election for any or all council positions to only voters residing within the ward associated with the council positions. If a city had so limited the voting in the general election to only voters residing within the ward, then the city shall be authorized to continue to do so. The elections for the remaining council position or council positions that are not associated with a ward shall be conducted as if the wards did not exist.

## Section 6
All general municipal elections in towns shall be held biennially in the odd-numbered years as provided in RCW 29A.04.330, except in towns that are moving or have moved their regular elections to even-numbered years under RCW 29A.04.330. The term of office of the mayor and treasurer shall be four years and until their successors are elected and qualified and assume office in accordance with RCW 29A.60.280, unless the town is transitioning its general municipal elections to even-numbered years as provided by RCW 29A.04.330: PROVIDED, That the term of the treasurer shall not commence in the same biennium in which the term of the mayor commences. Councilmembers shall be elected for four-year terms, unless the town is transitioning its general municipal elections to even-numbered years as provided by RCW 29A.04.330, and until their successors are elected and qualified and assume office in accordance with RCW 29A.60.280; three at one election and two at the next succeeding biennial election.

## Section 7
1. When a majority of the legislative body of an unclassified city determines that it would serve the best interests and general welfare of such municipality to change the election procedures of such city to the procedures specified in this section, such legislative body may, by resolution, declare its intention to adopt such procedures for the city. Such resolution must be adopted at least one hundred eighty days before the general municipal election at which the new election procedures are implemented. Within ten days after the passage of the resolution, the legislative body shall cause it to be published at least once in a newspaper of general circulation within the city.

2. All general municipal elections in an unclassified city adopting a resolution under subsection (1) of this section shall be held biennially  as provided in RCW 29A.04.330 and shall be held in accordance with the general election laws of the state. An unclassified city may hold its general municipal elections in even-numbered years under RCW 29A.04.330 but remains obligated to comply with the requirements of this section.

The term of the treasurer shall not commence in the same biennium in which the term of the mayor commences. Candidates for the city council shall run for specific council positions. The staggering of terms of city officers shall be established at the first election, where the simple majority of the persons elected as councilmembers receiving the greatest numbers of votes shall be elected to four-year terms of office and the remainder of the persons elected as councilmembers and the treasurer shall be elected to two-year terms of office. Thereafter, all elected city officers shall be elected for four-year terms and until their successors are elected and qualified and assume office in accordance with RCW 29A.60.280.

## Section 8
The first election of officers where required for reorganization under a different general plan of government newly adopted in a manner provided in RCW 35A.02.020, 35A.02.030, 35A.06.030, or 35A.06.060, as now or hereafter amended, shall be at the next general municipal election if one is to be held more than ninety days but not more than one hundred  eighty days after certification of a reorganization ordinance or resolution, or otherwise at a special election to be held for that purpose in accordance with RCW 29A.04.330, unless the city or town is moving or has moved its regularly scheduled elections to even-numbered years as provided by RCW 29A.04.330, in which case it shall hold regular elections rather than special elections. In the event that the first election of officers is to be held at a general municipal election, such election shall be preceded by a primary election pursuant to RCW 29A.52.210 and 29A.04.311. In the event that the first election of all officers is to be held at a special election rather than at a general election, and notwithstanding any provisions of any other law to the contrary, such special election shall be preceded by a primary election to be held on a date authorized by RCW 29A.04.321, and the persons nominated at that primary election shall be voted upon at the next succeeding special election that is authorized by RCW 29A.04.321: PROVIDED, That in the event the ordinances calling for reclassification or reclassification and reorganization under the provisions of this title have been filed with the secretary of state pursuant to RCW 35A.02.040 for a special election in an even-numbered year at least ninety days prior to a state general election then the election of new officers shall be concurrent with the state primary and general election and shall be conducted as set forth in general election law.

Upon reorganization, candidates for all offices shall file or be nominated for and successful candidates shall be elected to specific council positions. The initial terms of office for those elected at a first election of all officers shall be as follows: (1) A simple majority of the persons who are elected as councilmembers receiving the greatest numbers of votes and the mayor in a city with a mayor-council plan of government shall be elected to four-year terms of office, if the election is held in an odd-numbered year, or three-year terms of office, if the election is held in an even-numbered year except in the case of special elections in an even-numbered year, when terms are three years; and (2) the other persons who are elected as councilmembers shall be elected to two-year terms of office, if the election is held in an odd-numbered year, or one-year terms of office, if the election is held in an even-numbered year except in the case of special elections in an even-numbered year, when terms are one year. The newly elected officials shall take office immediately when they are elected and qualified, but the length of their terms of office shall be calculated from the first day of January in the year following the election. Thereafter, each person elected as a councilmember or mayor in a city with a mayor-council plan of government shall be elected to a four-year term of office. Each councilmember and mayor in a city with a mayor-council plan of government shall serve until a successor is elected and qualified and assumes office as provided in RCW 29A.60.280.

The former officers shall, upon the election and qualification of new officers, deliver to the proper officers of the reorganized noncharter code city all books of record, documents and papers in their possession belonging to such municipal corporation before the reorganization thereof.

## Section 9
Within thirty days after the effective date of the ordinance creating the municipal court, the mayor of each city or town shall appoint a municipal judge or judges of the municipal court for a term of four years. The terms of judges serving on July 1, 1984, and municipal judges who are appointed to terms commencing before January 1, 1986, shall expire January 1, 1986. The terms of their successors shall commence on January 1, 1986, and on January 1 of each fourth year thereafter, pursuant to appointment or election as provided in this chapter. Term lengths for municipal judges may be modified to comply with RCW 29A.04.330(6). Appointments shall be made on or before December 1 of the year next preceding the year in which the terms commence.

The legislative authority of a city or town that has the general power of confirmation over mayoral appointments shall have the power to confirm the appointment of a municipal judge.

A person appointed as a full-time or part-time municipal judge shall be a citizen of the United States of America and of the state of Washington; and an attorney admitted to practice law before the courts of record of the state of Washington: PROVIDED, That in a municipality having a population less than five thousand persons, a person who has taken and passed by January 1, 2003, the qualifying examination for a lay candidate for judicial officer as provided by rule of the supreme court may be the judge. Any city or town shall have authority to appoint a district judge as its municipal judge when the municipal judge is not required to serve full time. In the event of the appointment of a district judge, the city or town shall pay a pro rata share of the salary.

## Section 10
The legislative authority of the city or town may, by ordinance, provide that the position of municipal judge within the city or town shall be an elective position. The ordinance shall provide for the qualifications of the municipal judge which shall be the same as the qualifications necessary for the appointment thereof; and further, shall provide that the municipal judge shall be elected in the same manner as other elective city officials are elected to office, and that the term of the municipal judge shall be for a term of four years commencing on January 1, 1986, and every four years thereafter. Term lengths for municipal judges may be modified to comply with RCW 29A.04.330(6).

## Section 11
If specific funding for the purposes of this act, referencing this act by bill or chapter number, is not provided by June 30, 2025, in the omnibus appropriations act, this act is null and void.
