# 28C.18 - Workforce training and education.
* [28C.18.005 - Findings.](#28c18005---findings)
* [28C.18.010 - Definitions.](#28c18010---definitions)
* [28C.18.020 - Workforce training and education coordinating board.](#28c18020---workforce-training-and-education-coordinating-board)
* [28C.18.030 - Purpose of the board.](#28c18030---purpose-of-the-board)
* [28C.18.040 - Director's duties.](#28c18040---directors-duties)
* [28C.18.050 - Board designation and functions for federal purposes—Monitoring state plans for consistency.](#28c18050---board-designation-and-functions-for-federal-purposesmonitoring-state-plans-for-consistency)
* [28C.18.060 - Board's duties.](#28c18060---boards-duties)
* [28C.18.068 - Policies to accommodate student absences for reasons of faith or conscience or for activities conducted under the auspices of a religious organization.](#28c18068---policies-to-accommodate-student-absences-for-reasons-of-faith-or-conscience-or-for-activities-conducted-under-the-auspices-of-a-religious-organization)
* [28C.18.070 - Intent—"Program" clarified.](#28c18070---intentprogram-clarified)
* [28C.18.080 - Comprehensive plan—Contents—Updates—Agency operating plans—Reports to the legislature.](#28c18080---comprehensive-plancontentsupdatesagency-operating-plansreports-to-the-legislature)
* [28C.18.090 - Additional board duties—Program evaluation by operating agencies.](#28c18090---additional-board-dutiesprogram-evaluation-by-operating-agencies)
* [28C.18.100 - Assessments by board—Biennial report to legislature and governor.](#28c18100---assessments-by-boardbiennial-report-to-legislature-and-governor)
* [28C.18.110 - Identification of policies and methods to promote efficiency and sharing of resources—Report to governor and legislature.](#28c18110---identification-of-policies-and-methods-to-promote-efficiency-and-sharing-of-resourcesreport-to-governor-and-legislature)
* [28C.18.120 - State strategic plan for supply of health care personnel—Reports.](#28c18120---state-strategic-plan-for-supply-of-health-care-personnelreports)
* [28C.18.130 - Industry skill panels—Grants—Role.](#28c18130---industry-skill-panelsgrantsrole)
* [28C.18.140 - Industry skill panels—Standards—Report.](#28c18140---industry-skill-panelsstandardsreport)
* [28C.18.150 - Local unified plan for the workforce development system—Strategic plan.](#28c18150---local-unified-plan-for-the-workforce-development-systemstrategic-plan)
* [28C.18.160 - Opportunity internship program—Purpose—Program incentives—Rules.](#28c18160---opportunity-internship-programpurposeprogram-incentivesrules)
* [28C.18.162 - Opportunity internship program—Definitions.](#28c18162---opportunity-internship-programdefinitions)
* [28C.18.164 - Opportunity internship program—Opportunity internship consortia—Contracts—Federal funds.](#28c18164---opportunity-internship-programopportunity-internship-consortiacontractsfederal-funds)
* [28C.18.166 - Opportunity internship program—List of consortium graduates—Notifying office of student financial assistance of Washington college grant eligibility.](#28c18166---opportunity-internship-programlist-of-consortium-graduatesnotifying-office-of-student-financial-assistance-of-washington-college-grant-eligibility)
* [28C.18.168 - Opportunity internship program—List of employed graduates—Verification—Incentive payments.](#28c18168---opportunity-internship-programlist-of-employed-graduatesverificationincentive-payments)
* [28C.18.170 - Green industry skill panels—Prioritization of workforce training programs.](#28c18170---green-industry-skill-panelsprioritization-of-workforce-training-programs)
* [28C.18.180 - Lifelong learning program.](#28c18180---lifelong-learning-program)
* [28C.18.190 - Aerospace and advanced materials manufacturing—Program review—Analysis of training system.](#28c18190---aerospace-and-advanced-materials-manufacturingprogram-reviewanalysis-of-training-system)
* [28C.18.200 - Workforce education investment accountability and oversight board.](#28c18200---workforce-education-investment-accountability-and-oversight-board)
## 28C.18.005 - Findings.
The legislature finds that the state's system of workforce training and education is inadequate for meeting the needs of the state's workers, employers, and economy. A growing shortage of skilled workers is already hurting the state's economy. There is a shortage of available workers and too often prospective employees lack the skills and training needed by employers. Moreover, with demographic changes in the state's population employers will need to employ a more culturally diverse workforce in the future.

The legislature further finds that the state's current workforce training and education system is fragmented among numerous agencies, councils, boards, and committees, with inadequate overall coordination. No comprehensive strategic plan guides the different parts of the system. There is no single point of leadership and responsibility. There is insufficient guidance from employers and workers built into the system to ensure that the system is responsive to the needs of its customers. Adult workforce education lacks a uniform system of governance, with an inefficient division in governance between community colleges and vocational technical institutes, and inadequate local authority. The parts of the system providing adult basic skills and literacy education are especially uncoordinated and lack sufficient visibility to adequately address the needs of the large number of adults in the state who are functionally illiterate. The workforce training and education system's data and evaluation methods are inconsistent and unable to provide adequate information for determining how well the system is performing on a regular basis so that the system may be held accountable for the outcomes it produces. Much of the workforce training and education system provides inadequate opportunities to meet the needs of people from culturally diverse backgrounds. Finally, our public and private educational institutions are not producing the number of people educated in vocational/technical skills needed by employers.

The legislature recognizes that we must make certain that our public and private institutions of education place appropriate emphasis on the needs of employers and on the needs of the approximately eighty percent of our young people who enter the world of work without completing a four-year program of higher education. We must make our workforce education and training system better coordinated, more efficient, more responsive to the needs of business and workers and local communities, more accountable for its performance, and more open to the needs of a culturally diverse population.

\[ [1996 c 99 § 1](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/1995-96/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/Senate/6379-S.SL.pdf?cite=1996%20c%2099%20§%201); [1991 c 238 § 1](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/1991-92/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/Senate/5184-S.SL.pdf?cite=1991%20c%20238%20§%201); \]

## 28C.18.010 - Definitions.
Unless the context clearly requires otherwise, the definitions in this section apply throughout this title.

1. "Adult basic education" means instruction designed to achieve mastery of skills in reading, writing, oral communication, and computation at a level sufficient to allow the individual to function effectively as a parent, worker, and citizen in the United States, commensurate with that individual's actual ability level, and includes English as a second language and preparation and testing services for a high school equivalency certificate as provided in RCW 28B.50.536.

2. "Board" means the workforce training and education coordinating board.

3. "Director" means the director of the workforce training and education coordinating board.

4. "Industry skill panel" means a regional partnership of business, labor, and education leaders that identifies skill gaps in a key economic cluster and enables the industry and public partners to respond to and be proactive in addressing workforce skill needs.

5. "Training system" means programs and courses of secondary vocational education, technical college programs and courses, community college vocational programs and courses, private career school and college programs and courses, employer-sponsored training, adult basic education programs and courses, programs and courses funded by the federal workforce innovation and opportunity act, programs and courses funded by the federal vocational act, programs and courses funded under the federal adult education act, publicly funded programs and courses for adult literacy education, and apprenticeships, and programs and courses offered by private and public nonprofit organizations that are representative of communities or significant segments of communities and provide job training or adult literacy services.

6. "Vocational education" means organized educational programs offering a sequence of courses which are directly related to the preparation or retraining of individuals in paid or unpaid employment in current or emerging occupations requiring other than a baccalaureate or advanced degree. Such programs shall include competency-based applied learning which contributes to an individual's academic knowledge, higher-order reasoning, and problem-solving skills, work attitudes, general employability skills, and the occupational-specific skills necessary for economic independence as a productive and contributing member of society. Such term also includes applied technology education.

7. "Workforce development council" means a local workforce development board as established in P.L. 113-128 Sec. 107.

8. "Workforce skills" means skills developed through applied learning that strengthen and reinforce an individual's academic knowledge, critical thinking, problem solving, and work ethic and, thereby, develop the employability, occupational skills, and management of home and work responsibilities necessary for economic independence.

\[ [2017 c 39 § 3](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/2017-18/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/Senate/5237.SL.pdf?cite=2017%20c%2039%20§%203); [2013 c 39 § 16](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/2013-14/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/House/1686-S.SL.pdf?cite=2013%20c%2039%20§%2016); [2009 c 151 § 5](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/2009-10/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/House/1323-S.SL.pdf?cite=2009%20c%20151%20§%205); [2008 c 103 § 2](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/2007-08/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/Senate/5254-S.SL.pdf?cite=2008%20c%20103%20§%202); [1996 c 99 § 2](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/1995-96/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/Senate/6379-S.SL.pdf?cite=1996%20c%2099%20§%202); [1991 c 238 § 2](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/1991-92/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/Senate/5184-S.SL.pdf?cite=1991%20c%20238%20§%202); \]

## 28C.18.020 - Workforce training and education coordinating board.
1. There is hereby created the workforce training and education coordinating board as a state agency and as the successor agency to the state board for vocational education. Once the coordinating board has convened, all references to the state board for vocational education in the Revised Code of Washington shall be construed to mean the workforce training and education coordinating board, except that reference to the state board for vocational education in RCW 49.04.030 shall mean the state board for community and technical colleges.

2. [Empty]

    a.  The board shall consist of nine voting members appointed by the governor with the consent of the senate, as follows: Three representatives of business, three representatives of labor, and, serving as ex officio members, the superintendent of public instruction, the executive director of the state board for community and technical colleges, and the commissioner of the employment security department. The chair of the board shall be a nonvoting member selected by the governor with the consent of the senate, and shall serve at the pleasure of the governor. In selecting the chair, the governor shall seek a person who understands the future economic needs of the state and nation and the role that the state's training system has in meeting those needs. Each voting member of the board may appoint a designee to function in his or her place with the right to vote. In making appointments to the board, the governor shall seek to ensure geographic, ethnic, and gender diversity and balance. The governor shall also seek to ensure diversity and balance by the appointment of persons with disabilities.

    b.  The business representatives shall be selected from among nominations provided by a statewide business organization representing a cross section of industries. However, the governor may request, and the organization shall provide, an additional list or lists from which the governor shall select the business representatives. The nominations and selections shall reflect the cultural diversity of the state, including women, people with disabilities, and racial and ethnic minorities, and diversity in sizes of businesses.

    c.  The labor representatives shall be selected from among nominations provided by statewide labor organizations. However, the governor may request, and the organizations shall provide, an additional list or lists from which the governor shall select the labor representatives. The nominations and selections shall reflect the cultural diversity of the state, including women, people with disabilities, and racial and ethnic minorities.

    d.  Each business member may cast a proxy vote or votes for any business member who is not present and who authorizes in writing the present member to cast such vote.

    e.  Each labor member may cast a proxy vote for any labor member who is not present and who authorizes in writing the present member to cast such vote.

    f.  The chair shall appoint to the board one nonvoting member to represent racial and ethnic minorities, women, and people with disabilities. The nonvoting member appointed by the chair shall serve for a term of four years with the term expiring on June 30th of the fourth year of the term.

    g.  The business members of the board shall serve for terms of four years, the terms expiring on June 30th of the fourth year of the term except that in the case of initial members, one shall be appointed to a two-year term and one appointed to a three-year term.

    h.  The labor members of the board shall serve for terms of four years, the terms expiring on June 30th of the fourth year of the term except that in the case of initial members, one shall be appointed to a two-year term and one appointed to a three-year term.

    i.  Any vacancies among board members representing business or labor shall be filled by the governor with nominations provided by statewide organizations representing business or labor, respectively.

    j.  The board shall adopt bylaws and shall meet at least bimonthly and at such other times as determined by the chair who shall give reasonable prior notice to the members or at the request of a majority of the voting members.

    k.  Members of the board shall be compensated in accordance with RCW 43.03.040 and shall receive travel expenses in accordance with RCW 43.03.050 and 43.03.060.

    l.  The board shall be formed and ready to assume its responsibilities under this chapter by October 1, 1991.

    m.  The director of the board shall be appointed by the governor from a list of three names submitted by a committee made up of the business and labor members of the board. However, the governor may request, and the committee shall provide, an additional list or lists from which the governor shall select the director. The governor may dismiss the director only with the approval of a majority vote of the board. The board, by a majority vote, may dismiss the director with the approval of the governor.

3. The state board for vocational education is hereby abolished and its powers, duties, and functions are hereby transferred to the workforce training and education coordinating board. All references to the director or the state board for vocational education in the Revised Code of Washington shall be construed to mean the director or the workforce training and education coordinating board.

\[ [2010 c 128 § 6](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/2009-10/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/Senate/5295-S.SL.pdf?cite=2010%20c%20128%20§%206); [1991 c 238 § 3](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/1991-92/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/Senate/5184-S.SL.pdf?cite=1991%20c%20238%20§%203); \]

## 28C.18.030 - Purpose of the board.
The purpose of the board is to provide planning, coordination, evaluation, monitoring, and policy analysis for the state training system as a whole, and advice to the governor and legislature concerning the state training system, in cooperation with the state training system and the student achievement council.

\[ [2012 c 229 § 578](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/2011-12/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/House/2483-S2.SL.pdf?cite=2012%20c%20229%20§%20578); [1996 c 99 § 3](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/1995-96/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/Senate/6379-S.SL.pdf?cite=1996%20c%2099%20§%203); [1991 c 238 § 4](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/1991-92/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/Senate/5184-S.SL.pdf?cite=1991%20c%20238%20§%204); \]

## 28C.18.040 - Director's duties.
1. The director shall serve as chief executive officer of the board who shall administer the provisions of this chapter, employ such personnel as may be necessary to implement the purposes of this chapter, and utilize staff of existing operating agencies to the fullest extent possible.

2. The director shall not be the chair of the board.

3. Subject to the approval of the board, the director shall appoint necessary deputy and assistant directors and other staff who shall be exempt from the provisions of chapter 41.06 RCW. The director's appointees shall serve at the director's pleasure on such terms and conditions as the director determines but subject to chapter 42.52 RCW.

4. The director shall appoint and employ such other employees as may be required for the proper discharge of the functions of the board.

5. The director shall, as permissible under P.L. 101-392, as amended, integrate the staff of the council on vocational education, and contract with the state board for community and technical colleges for assistance for adult basic skills and literacy policy development and planning as required by P.L. 100-297, as amended.

\[ [1994 c 154 § 307](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/1993-94/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/Senate/6111-S.SL.pdf?cite=1994%20c%20154%20§%20307); [1991 c 238 § 5](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/1991-92/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/Senate/5184-S.SL.pdf?cite=1991%20c%20238%20§%205); \]

## 28C.18.050 - Board designation and functions for federal purposes—Monitoring state plans for consistency.
1. The board shall be designated as the state board of vocational education as provided for in P.L. 98-524, as amended, and shall perform such functions as is necessary to comply with federal directives pertaining to the provisions of such law.

2. The board shall perform the functions of the human resource investment council as provided for in the federal job training partnership act, P.L. 97-300, as amended.

3. The board shall provide policy advice for any federal act pertaining to workforce development that is not required by state or federal law to be provided by another state body.

4. Upon enactment of new federal initiatives relating to workforce development, the board shall advise the governor and the legislature on mechanisms for integrating the federal initiatives into the state's workforce development system and make recommendations on the legislative or administrative measures necessary to streamline and coordinate state efforts to meet federal guidelines.

5. The board shall monitor for consistency with the state comprehensive plan for workforce training and education the policies and plans established by the state job training coordinating council, the advisory council on adult education, and the Washington state plan for adult basic education, and provide guidance for making such policies and plans consistent with the state comprehensive plan for workforce training and education.

\[ [1995 c 130 § 3](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/1995-96/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/Senate/5992-S.SL.pdf?cite=1995%20c%20130%20§%203); [1991 c 238 § 6](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/1991-92/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/Senate/5184-S.SL.pdf?cite=1991%20c%20238%20§%206); \]

## 28C.18.060 - Board's duties.
The board, in cooperation with the operating agencies of the state training system and private career schools and colleges, shall:

1. Concentrate its major efforts on planning, coordination evaluation, policy analysis, and recommending improvements to the state's training system;

2. Advocate for the state training system and for meeting the needs of employers and the workforce for workforce education and training;

3. Establish and maintain an inventory of the programs of the state training system, and related state programs, and perform a biennial assessment of the vocational education, training, and adult basic education and literacy needs of the state; identify ongoing and strategic education needs; and assess the extent to which employment, training, vocational and basic education, rehabilitation services, and public assistance services represent a consistent, integrated approach to meet such needs;

4. Develop and maintain a state comprehensive plan for workforce training and education, including but not limited to, goals, objectives, and priorities for the state training system, and review the state training system for consistency with the state comprehensive plan. In developing the state comprehensive plan for workforce training and education, the board shall use, but shall not be limited to: Economic, labor market, and populations trends reports in office of financial management forecasts; joint office of financial management and employment security department labor force, industry employment, and occupational forecasts; the results of scientifically based outcome, net-impact and cost-benefit evaluations; the needs of employers as evidenced in formal employer surveys and other employer input; and the needs of program participants and workers as evidenced in formal surveys and other input from program participants and the labor community;

5. In consultation with the student achievement council, review and make recommendations to the office of financial management and the legislature on operating and capital facilities budget requests for operating agencies of the state training system for purposes of consistency with the state comprehensive plan for workforce training and education;

6. Provide for coordination among the different operating agencies and components of the state training system at the state level and at the regional level;

7. Develop a consistent and reliable database on vocational education enrollments, costs, program activities, and job placements from publicly funded vocational education programs in this state;

8. [Empty]

    a.  Establish standards for data collection and maintenance for the operating agencies of the state training system in a format that is accessible to use by the board. The board shall require a minimum of common core data to be collected by each operating agency of the state training system;

    b.  Develop requirements for minimum common core data in consultation with the office of financial management and the operating agencies of the training system;

9. Establish minimum standards for program evaluation for the operating agencies of the state training system, including, but not limited to, the use of common survey instruments and procedures for measuring perceptions of program participants and employers of program participants, and monitor such program evaluation;

10. Every two years administer scientifically based outcome evaluations of the state training system, including, but not limited to, surveys of program participants, surveys of employers of program participants, and matches with employment security department payroll and wage files. Every five years administer scientifically based net-impact and cost-benefit evaluations of the state training system;

11. In cooperation with the employment security department, provide for the improvement and maintenance of quality and utility in occupational information and forecasts for use in training system planning and evaluation. Improvements shall include, but not be limited to, development of state-based occupational change factors involving input by employers and employees, and delineation of skill and training requirements by education level associated with current and forecasted occupations;

12. Provide for the development of common course description formats, common reporting requirements, and common definitions for operating agencies of the training system;

13. Provide for effectiveness and efficiency reviews of the state training system;

14. In cooperation with the student achievement council, facilitate transfer of credit policies and agreements between institutions of the state training system, and encourage articulation agreements for programs encompassing two years of secondary workforce education and two years of postsecondary workforce education;

15. In cooperation with the student achievement council, facilitate transfer of credit policies and agreements between private training institutions and institutions of the state training system;

16. Develop policy objectives for the workforce innovation and opportunity act, P.L. 113-128, or its successor; develop coordination criteria for activities under the act with related programs and services provided by state and local education and training agencies; and ensure that entrepreneurial training opportunities are available through programs of each local workforce development board in the state;

17. Ensure that the expansion of K-12 and postsecondary opportunities for career connected learning and work-integrated learning, as those terms are defined in RCW 28C.30.020, is incorporated into the state plan adopted for the purposes of the Carl D. Perkins career and technical education improvement act, P.L. 109-270;

18. Make recommendations to the commission of student assessment, the state board of education, and the superintendent of public instruction, concerning basic skill competencies and essential core competencies for K-12 education. Basic skills for this purpose shall be reading, writing, computation, speaking, and critical thinking, essential core competencies for this purpose shall be English, math, science/technology, history, geography, and critical thinking. The board shall monitor the development of and provide advice concerning secondary curriculum which integrates vocational and academic education;

19. Establish and administer programs for marketing and outreach to businesses and potential program participants;

20. Facilitate the location of support services, including but not limited to, child care, financial aid, career counseling, and job placement services, for students and trainees at institutions in the state training system, and advocate for support services for trainees and students in the state training system;

21. Facilitate private sector assistance for the state training system, including but not limited to: Financial assistance, rotation of private and public personnel, and vocational counseling;

22. Facilitate the development of programs for school-to-work transition that combine classroom education and on-the-job training, including entrepreneurial education and training, in industries and occupations without a significant number of apprenticeship programs;

23. Include in the planning requirements for local workforce development boards a requirement that the local workforce development boards specify how entrepreneurial training is to be offered through the one-stop system required under the workforce innovation and opportunity act, P.L. 113-128, or its successor;

24. Encourage and assess progress for the equitable representation of racial and ethnic minorities, women, and people with disabilities among the students, teachers, and administrators of the state training system. Equitable, for this purpose, shall mean substantially proportional to their percentage of the state population in the geographic area served. This function of the board shall in no way lessen more stringent state or federal requirements for representation of racial and ethnic minorities, women, and people with disabilities;

25. Participate in the planning and policy development of governor set-aside grants under P.L. 97-300, as amended;

26. Administer veterans' programs, licensure of private vocational schools, the job skills program, and the Washington award for vocational excellence;

27. Allocate funding from the state job training trust fund;

28. Work with the director of commerce to ensure coordination among workforce training priorities and economic development and entrepreneurial development efforts, including but not limited to assistance to industry clusters;

29. Conduct research into workforce development programs designed to reduce the high unemployment rate among young people between approximately eighteen and twenty-four years of age. In consultation with the operating agencies, the board shall advise the governor and legislature on policies and programs to alleviate the high unemployment rate among young people. The research shall include disaggregated demographic information and, to the extent possible, income data for adult youth. The research shall also include a comparison of the effectiveness of programs examined as a part of the research conducted in this subsection in relation to the public investment made in these programs in reducing unemployment of young adults. The board shall report to the appropriate committees of the legislature by November 15, 2008, and every two years thereafter. Where possible, the data reported to the legislative committees should be reported in numbers and in percentages;

30. Adopt rules as necessary to implement this chapter.

The board may delegate to the director any of the functions of this section.

\[ [2019 c 406 § 61](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/2019-20/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/House/2158-S2.SL.pdf?cite=2019%20c%20406%20§%2061); [2017 c 39 § 4](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/2017-18/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/Senate/5237.SL.pdf?cite=2017%20c%2039%20§%204); [2014 c 112 § 103](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/2013-14/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/House/2029-S2.SL.pdf?cite=2014%20c%20112%20§%20103); [2012 c 229 § 579](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/2011-12/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/House/2483-S2.SL.pdf?cite=2012%20c%20229%20§%20579); [2009 c 151 § 6](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/2009-10/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/House/1323-S.SL.pdf?cite=2009%20c%20151%20§%206); [2008 c 212 § 2](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/2007-08/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/Senate/6261.SL.pdf?cite=2008%20c%20212%20§%202); [2007 c 149 § 1](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/2007-08/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/Senate/5613.SL.pdf?cite=2007%20c%20149%20§%201); [1996 c 99 § 4](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/1995-96/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/Senate/6379-S.SL.pdf?cite=1996%20c%2099%20§%204); [1993 c 280 § 17](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/1993-94/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/Senate/5868-S.SL.pdf?cite=1993%20c%20280%20§%2017); [1991 c 238 § 7](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/1991-92/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/Senate/5184-S.SL.pdf?cite=1991%20c%20238%20§%207); \]

## 28C.18.068 - Policies to accommodate student absences for reasons of faith or conscience or for activities conducted under the auspices of a religious organization.
State-funded workforce training programs must develop policies to accommodate student absences for up to two days per academic year, to allow students to take holidays for reasons of faith or conscience or for organized activities conducted under the auspices of a religious denomination, church, or religious organization, so that students' grades are not adversely impacted by the absences.

\[ [2014 c 168 § 5](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/2013-14/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/Senate/5173-S.SL.pdf?cite=2014%20c%20168%20§%205); \]

## 28C.18.070 - Intent—"Program" clarified.
1. The legislature continues to recognize the vital role that workforce development efforts play in equipping the state's workers with the skills they need to succeed in an economy that requires higher levels of skill and knowledge. The legislature also recognizes that businesses are increasingly relying on the state's workforce development programs and expect them to be responsive to their changing skill requirements. The state benefits from a workforce development system that allows firms and workers to be highly competitive in global markets.

2. The establishment of the workforce training and education coordinating board was an integral step in developing a strategic approach to workforce development. For the coordinating board to carry out its intended role, the board must be able to give unambiguous guidance to operating agencies, the governor, and the legislature. It is the intent of chapter 130, Laws of 1995, to clarify the preeminent role intended for the workforce training and education coordinating board in coordination and policy development of the state's workforce development efforts.

3. In the event that federal workforce development funds are block granted to the state, it is the intent of the legislature to seek the broadest possible input, from local and statewide organizations concerned with workforce development, on the allocation of the federal funds.

4. For purposes of RCW 28C.18.080 through 28C.18.110, the term "program" shall not refer to the activities of individual institutions such as individual community or technical colleges, common schools, service delivery areas, or job service centers; nor shall it refer to individual fields of study or courses.

\[ [1995 c 130 § 1](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/1995-96/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/Senate/5992-S.SL.pdf?cite=1995%20c%20130%20§%201); \]

## 28C.18.080 - Comprehensive plan—Contents—Updates—Agency operating plans—Reports to the legislature.
1. The board shall develop a state comprehensive plan for workforce training and education for a ten-year time period. The board shall submit the ten-year state comprehensive plan to the governor and the appropriate legislative policy committees. Every four years by December 1st, beginning December 1, 2012, the board shall submit an update of the ten-year state comprehensive plan for workforce training and education to the governor and the appropriate legislative policy committees. Following public hearings, the legislature shall, by concurrent resolution, approve or recommend changes to the initial plan and the updates. The plan shall then become the state's workforce training policy unless legislation is enacted to alter the policies set forth in the plan.

2. The comprehensive plan shall include workforce training role and mission statements for the workforce development programs of operating agencies represented on the board and sufficient specificity regarding expected actions by the operating agencies to allow them to carry out actions consistent with the comprehensive plan.

3. Operating agencies represented on the board shall have operating plans for their workforce development efforts that are consistent with the comprehensive plan and that provide detail on implementation steps they will take to carry out their responsibilities under the plan. Each operating agency represented on the board shall provide an annual progress report to the board.

4. The comprehensive plan shall include recommendations to the legislature and the governor on the modification, consolidation, initiation, or elimination of workforce training and education programs in the state.

5. The comprehensive plan shall identify the strategic industry clusters targeted by the workforce development system. In identifying the strategic clusters, the board shall consult with the department of commerce to identify clusters that meet the criteria identified by the working group convened by the department of commerce and the workforce training and education coordinating board under RCW 43.330.280.

6. The board shall report to the appropriate legislative policy committees by December 1st of each year on its progress in implementing the comprehensive plan and on the progress of the operating agencies in meeting their obligations under the plan.

\[ [2014 c 112 § 104](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/2013-14/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/House/2029-S2.SL.pdf?cite=2014%20c%20112%20§%20104); [2009 c 421 § 6](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/2009-10/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/Senate/5473-S.SL.pdf?cite=2009%20c%20421%20§%206); [2009 c 151 § 7](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/2009-10/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/House/1323-S.SL.pdf?cite=2009%20c%20151%20§%207); [2009 c 92 § 1](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/2009-10/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/House/1394.SL.pdf?cite=2009%20c%2092%20§%201); [1997 c 369 § 5](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/1997-98/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/House/2170-S.SL.pdf?cite=1997%20c%20369%20§%205); [1995 c 130 § 2](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/1995-96/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/Senate/5992-S.SL.pdf?cite=1995%20c%20130%20§%202); \]

## 28C.18.090 - Additional board duties—Program evaluation by operating agencies.
1. The board shall specify, by December 31, 1995, the common core data to be collected by the operating agencies of the state training system and the standards for data collection and maintenance required in RCW 28C.18.060(8).

2. The minimum standards for program evaluation by operating agencies required in RCW 28C.18.060(9) shall include biennial program evaluations; the first of such evaluations shall be completed by the operating agencies July 1, 1996. The program evaluation of adult basic skills education shall be provided by the advisory council on adult education.

3. The board shall complete, by January 1, 1996, its first outcome-based evaluation and, by September 1, 1996, its nonexperimental net-impact and cost-benefit evaluations of the training system. The outcome, net-impact, and cost-benefit evaluations shall for the first evaluations, include evaluations of each of the following programs: Secondary vocational-technical education, work-related adult basic skills education, postsecondary workforce training, job training partnership act titles II and III, as well as of the system as a whole.

4. The board shall use the results of its outcome, net-impact, and cost-benefit evaluations to develop and make recommendations to the legislature and the governor for the modification, consolidation, initiation, or elimination of workforce training and education programs in the state.

The board shall perform the requirements of this section in cooperation with the operating agencies.

\[ [1995 c 130 § 4](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/1995-96/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/Senate/5992-S.SL.pdf?cite=1995%20c%20130%20§%204); \]

## 28C.18.100 - Assessments by board—Biennial report to legislature and governor.
The board shall, by January 1, 1996, and biennially thereafter: (1) Assess the total demand for training from the perspective of workers, and from the perspective of employers; (2) assess the available supply of publicly and privately provided training which workers and employers are demanding; (3) assess the costs to the state of meeting the demand; and (4) present the legislature and the governor with a strategy for bridging the gap between the supply and the demand for training services.

\[ [1995 c 130 § 5](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/1995-96/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/Senate/5992-S.SL.pdf?cite=1995%20c%20130%20§%205); \]

## 28C.18.110 - Identification of policies and methods to promote efficiency and sharing of resources—Report to governor and legislature.
The board shall, in cooperation with the operating agencies, by January 1, 1996:

1. Identify policies to reduce administrative and other barriers to efficient operation of the state's workforce development system and barriers to improved coordination of workforce development in the state. These policies shall include waivers of statutory requirements and administrative rules, as well as implementation of one-stop access to workforce development services and school-to-work transition;

2. Identify ways for operating agencies to share resources, instructors, and curricula through collaboration with other public and private entities to increase training opportunities and reduce costs; and

3. Report to the governor and the appropriate legislative committees its recommendations for any statutory changes necessary to enhance operational efficiencies or improve coordination. The board shall work with the operating agencies of the state's workforce development system to reduce administrative barriers that do not require statutory changes.

\[ [1995 c 130 § 6](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/1995-96/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/Senate/5992-S.SL.pdf?cite=1995%20c%20130%20§%206); \]

## 28C.18.120 - State strategic plan for supply of health care personnel—Reports.
The board shall:

1. Facilitate ongoing collaboration among stakeholders in order to address the health care personnel shortage;

2. In collaboration with stakeholders, establish and maintain a state strategic plan for ensuring an adequate supply of health care personnel that safeguards the ability of the health care delivery system in Washington state to provide quality, accessible health care to residents of Washington; and

3. Report to the governor and legislature by December 31, 2003, and annually thereafter, on progress on the state plan and make additional recommendations as necessary.

\[ [2003 c 278 § 2](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/2003-04/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/House/1852-S.SL.pdf?cite=2003%20c%20278%20§%202); \]

## 28C.18.130 - Industry skill panels—Grants—Role.
1. Subject to funding provided for the purposes of this section, the board, in consultation with the state board for community and technical colleges, the *department of community, trade, and economic development, and the employment security department, shall allocate grants on a competitive basis to establish and support industry skill panels.

2. Eligible applicants for the grants allocated under this section include, but are not limited to, workforce development councils, community and technical colleges, economic development councils, private career schools, chambers of commerce, trade associations, and apprenticeship councils.

3. Entities applying for a grant under this section shall provide an employer match of at least twenty-five percent to be eligible. The local match may include in-kind services.

4. It shall be the role of industry skill panels funded under this chapter to enable businesses in the industry to address workforce skill needs. Industry skill panels shall identify workforce strategies to meet the needs in order to benefit employers and workers across the industry. Examples of strategies include, but are not limited to: Developing career guidance materials; producing or updating skill standards and curricula; designing training programs and courses; developing technical assessments and certifications; arranging employer mentoring, tutoring, and internships; identifying private sector assistance in providing faculty or equipment to training providers; and organizing industry conferences disseminating best practices. The products and services of particular skill panels shall depend upon the needs of the industry.

\[ [2008 c 103 § 3](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/2007-08/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/Senate/5254-S.SL.pdf?cite=2008%20c%20103%20§%203); \]

## 28C.18.140 - Industry skill panels—Standards—Report.
The board shall establish industry skill panel standards that identify the expectations for industry skill panel products and services. The board shall establish the standards in consultation with labor, the state board for community and technical colleges, the employment security department, the institute of workforce development and economic sustainability, and the *department of community, trade, and economic development. Continued funding of particular industry skill panels shall be based on meeting the standards established by the board under this section.  Beginning December 1, 2008, the board shall report annually to the governor and the economic development and higher education committees of the legislature on the results of the industry skill panels funded under this chapter in meeting the standards.

\[ [2008 c 103 § 4](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/2007-08/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/Senate/5254-S.SL.pdf?cite=2008%20c%20103%20§%204); \]

## 28C.18.150 - Local unified plan for the workforce development system—Strategic plan.
1. Workforce development councils, in partnership with local elected officials, shall develop and maintain a local unified plan for the workforce development system including, but not limited to, the local plan required by P.L. 113-128 Sec. 108. The unified plan shall include a strategic plan that assesses local employment opportunities and skill needs, the present and future workforce, the current workforce development system, information on financial resources, diversity, goals, objectives, and strategies for the local workforce development system, and a systemwide financial strategy for implementing the plan. Local workforce development councils shall submit their strategic plans to the board for review and to the governor for approval.

2. The strategic plan shall clearly articulate the connection between workforce and economic development efforts in the local area including the area industry clusters and the strategic clusters the community is targeting for growth. The plan shall include, but is not limited to:

    a.  Data on current and projected employment opportunities in the local area;

    b.  Identification of workforce investment needs of existing businesses and businesses considering location in the region, with special attention to industry clusters;

    c.  Identification of educational, training, employment, and support service needs of job seekers and workers in the local area, including individuals with disabilities and other underrepresented talent sources;

    d.  Analysis of the industry demand, potential labor force supply, and educational, employment, and workforce support available to businesses and job seekers in the region; and

    e.  Collaboration with associate development organizations in regional planning efforts involving combined strategies around workforce development and economic development policies and programs. Combined planning efforts shall include, but not be limited to, assistance to industry clusters in the area.

3. The board shall work with workforce development councils to develop implementation and funding strategies for purposes of this section.

\[ [2017 c 39 § 5](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/2017-18/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/Senate/5237.SL.pdf?cite=2017%20c%2039%20§%205); [2009 c 151 § 8](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/2009-10/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/House/1323-S.SL.pdf?cite=2009%20c%20151%20§%208); \]

## 28C.18.160 - Opportunity internship program—Purpose—Program incentives—Rules.
1. The opportunity internship program is created under this section and RCW 28C.18.162 through 28C.18.168. The purpose of the program is to provide incentives for opportunity internship consortia to use existing resources to build educational and employment pipelines to high-demand occupations in targeted industries for low-income high school students. Three types of incentives are provided through the program:

    a.  Each opportunity internship graduate shall be eligible for up to one year of financial assistance for postsecondary education as provided in *RCW 28B.92.084;

    b.  Each opportunity internship graduate who completes a postsecondary program of study shall receive a job interview with an employer participating in an opportunity internship consortium that has agreed to provide such interviews; and

    c.  For each opportunity internship graduate who completes a postsecondary program of study, obtains employment in a high-demand occupation that pays a starting salary or wages of not less than thirty thousand dollars per year, and remains employed for at least six months, the participating opportunity internship consortium shall be eligible to receive an incentive payment as provided in RCW 28C.18.168.

2. The opportunity internship program shall be administered by the board and the board may adopt rules to implement the program.

\[ [2009 c 238 § 2](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/2009-10/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/House/1355-S2.SL.pdf?cite=2009%20c%20238%20§%202); \]

## 28C.18.162 - Opportunity internship program—Definitions.
Unless the context clearly requires otherwise, the definitions in this section apply throughout this section and RCW 28C.18.160 and 28C.18.164 through 28C.18.168.

1. "High-demand occupation" means an occupation with a substantial number of current or projected employment opportunities.

2. "Low-income high school student" means a student who is enrolled in grades ten, eleven, or twelve in a public high school and who qualifies for federal free or reduced-price meals. If a student qualifies at the time the student begins participating in the opportunity internship program, the student remains eligible even if the student does not receive free or reduced-price meals thereafter. To participate in the program, the student must remain enrolled in high school until the student receives a high school diploma.

3. "Opportunity internship consortium" means a local consortium formed for the purpose of participating in the opportunity internship program and which may be composed of a local workforce development council, economic development council, area high schools, community or technical colleges, apprenticeship councils, preapprenticeship programs such as running start for the trades, private vocational schools licensed under chapter 28C.10 RCW, public and private four-year institutions of higher education, employers in targeted industries, and labor organizations.

4. "Opportunity internship graduate" means a low-income high school student who successfully completes an opportunity internship program and graduates from high school.

5. "Postsecondary program of study" means an undergraduate or graduate certificate, apprenticeship, or degree program.

6. "Preapprenticeship" means a program of at least ninety hours and not more than one hundred eighty hours in length that provides practical experience, education, preparation, and the development of skills that would be beneficial for entry into state-approved apprenticeship programs, including but not limited to construction industry structure and the construction process; orientation to state-approved apprenticeship; tools of the various trades and safe handling of power tools; and industry standards of safety, responsibility, and craft excellence.

7. "Targeted industry" means a business or industry identified by a local workforce development council as having high-demand occupations that require candidates to have completed a postsecondary program of study.

\[ [2009 c 238 § 3](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/2009-10/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/House/1355-S2.SL.pdf?cite=2009%20c%20238%20§%203); \]

## 28C.18.164 - Opportunity internship program—Opportunity internship consortia—Contracts—Federal funds.
1. Opportunity internship consortia may apply to the board to offer an opportunity internship program.

    a.  The board, in consultation with the Washington state apprenticeship and training council, may select those consortia that demonstrate the strongest commitment and readiness to implement a high quality opportunity internship program for low-income high school students. The board shall place a priority on consortia with demonstrated experience working with similar populations of students and demonstrated capacity to assist a large number of students through the progression of internship or preapprenticeship, high school graduation, postsecondary education, and retention in a high-demand occupation. The board shall place a priority on programs that emphasize secondary career and technical education and nonbaccalaureate postsecondary education; however, programs that target four-year postsecondary degrees are eligible to participate.

    b.  [Empty]

        i.  Except as provided in (b)(ii) of this subsection (1), the board shall enter into a contract with each consortium selected to participate in the program. No more than ten consortia per year shall be selected to participate in the program, and to the extent possible, the board shall assure a geographic distribution of consortia in regions across the state emphasizing a variety of targeted industries. Each consortium may select no more than one hundred low-income high school students per year to participate in the program.

        ii.  For fiscal years 2011 through 2013, the board shall enter into a contract with each consortium selected to participate in the program. No more than twelve consortia per year shall be selected to participate in the program, and to the extent possible, the board shall assure a geographic distribution of consortia in regions across the state emphasizing a variety of targeted industries. No more than five thousand low-income high school students per year may be selected to participate in the program.

2. Under the terms of an opportunity internship program contract, an opportunity internship consortium shall commit to the following activities which shall be conducted using existing federal, state, local, or private funds available to the consortium:

    a.  Identify high-demand occupations in targeted industries for which opportunity internships or preapprenticeships shall be developed and provided;

    b.  Develop and implement the components of opportunity internships, including paid or unpaid internships or preapprenticeships of at least ninety hours in length in high-demand occupations with employers in the consortium, mentoring and guidance for students who participate in the program, assistance with applications for postsecondary programs and financial aid, and a guarantee of a job interview with a participating employer for all opportunity internship graduates who successfully complete a postsecondary program of study;

    c.  Once the internship or preapprenticeship components have been developed, conduct outreach efforts to inform low-income high school students about high-demand occupations, the opportunity internship program, options for postsecondary programs of study, and the incentives and opportunities provided to students who participate in the program;

    d.  Obtain appropriate documentation of the low-income status of students who participate in the program;

    e.  Maintain communication with opportunity internship graduates of the consortium who enroll in postsecondary programs of study; and

    f.  Submit an annual report to the board on the progress of and participation in the opportunity internship program of the consortium.

3. Opportunity internship consortia are encouraged to:

    a.  Provide paid opportunity internships or preapprenticeships, including during the summer months to encourage students to stay enrolled in high school;

    b.  Work with high schools to offer opportunity internships as approved worksite learning experiences where students can earn high school credit;

    c.  Designate the local workforce development council as fiscal agent for the opportunity internship program contract;

    d.  Work with area high schools to incorporate the opportunity internship program into comprehensive guidance and counseling programs such as the navigation 101 program; and

    e.  Coordinate the opportunity internship program with other workforce development and postsecondary education programs, including opportunity grants, the college bound scholarship program, federal workforce innovation and opportunity act initiatives, and college access challenge grants.

4. The board shall seek federal funds that may be used to support the opportunity internship program, including providing the incentive payments under RCW 28C.18.168.

\[ [2017 c 39 § 6](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/2017-18/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/Senate/5237.SL.pdf?cite=2017%20c%2039%20§%206); [2010 1st sp.s. c 24 § 4](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/2009-10/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/House/2630-S2.SL.pdf?cite=2010%201st%20sp.s.%20c%2024%20§%204); [2009 c 238 § 4](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/2009-10/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/House/1355-S2.SL.pdf?cite=2009%20c%20238%20§%204); \]

## 28C.18.166 - Opportunity internship program—List of consortium graduates—Notifying office of student financial assistance of Washington college grant eligibility.
On an annual basis, each opportunity internship consortium shall provide the board with a list of the opportunity internship graduates from the consortium. The board shall compile the lists from all consortia and shall notify the office of student financial assistance of the eligibility of each graduate on the lists to receive a Washington college grant under chapter 28B.92 RCW if the graduate enrolls in a postsecondary program of study within one year of high school graduation.

\[ [2019 c 406 § 48](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/2019-20/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/House/2158-S2.SL.pdf?cite=2019%20c%20406%20§%2048); [2011 1st sp.s. c 11 § 242](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/2011-12/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/Senate/5182-S2.SL.pdf?cite=2011%201st%20sp.s.%20c%2011%20§%20242); [2009 c 238 § 5](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/2009-10/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/House/1355-S2.SL.pdf?cite=2009%20c%20238%20§%205); \]

## 28C.18.168 - Opportunity internship program—List of employed graduates—Verification—Incentive payments.
1. On an annual basis, each opportunity internship consortium shall provide the board with a list of the opportunity internship graduates from the consortium who have completed a postsecondary program of study, obtained employment in a high-demand occupation that pays a starting salary or wages of not less than thirty thousand dollars per year, and remained employed for at least six months.

2. The board shall verify the information on the lists from each consortium. Subject to funds appropriated or otherwise available for this purpose, the board shall allocate to each consortium an incentive payment of two thousand dollars for each graduate on the consortium's list. In the event that insufficient funds are appropriated to provide a full payment, the board shall prorate payments across all consortia and shall notify the governor and the legislature of the amount of the shortfall.

3. Opportunity internship consortia shall use the incentive payments to continue operating opportunity internship programs.

\[ [2009 c 238 § 6](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/2009-10/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/House/1355-S2.SL.pdf?cite=2009%20c%20238%20§%206); \]

## 28C.18.170 - Green industry skill panels—Prioritization of workforce training programs.
1. The legislature directs the board to create and pilot green industry skill panels. These panels shall consist of business representatives from industry sectors related to clean energy, labor unions representing workers in those industries or labor affiliates administering state-approved, joint apprenticeship programs or labor-management partnership programs that train workers for these industries, state and local veterans agencies, employer associations, educational institutions, and local workforce development councils within the region that the panels propose to operate, and other key stakeholders as determined by the applicant. Any of these stakeholder organizations are eligible to receive grants under this section and serve as the intermediary that convenes and leads the panel. Panel applicants must provide labor market and industry analysis that demonstrates high demand, or demand of strategic importance to the development of the state's clean energy economy as identified in this section, for middle or high-wage occupations, or occupations that are part of career pathways to the same, within the relevant industry sector. The panel shall, in consultation with the department and the *leadership team:

    a.  Conduct labor market and industry analyses, in consultation with the employment security department, and drawing on the findings of its research when available;

    b.  Recommend strategies to meet the recruitment and training needs of the industry and small businesses; and

    c.  Recommend strategies to leverage and align other public and private funding sources.

2. The board may prioritize workforce training programs that lead to a credential, certificate, or degree in green economy jobs. For purposes of this section, green economy jobs include those in the primary industries of a green economy, including clean energy, high-efficiency building, green transportation, and environmental protection. Prioritization efforts may include but are not limited to: (a) Prioritization of the use of high employer-demand funding for workforce training programs in green economy jobs; (b) increased outreach efforts to public utilities, education, labor, government, and private industry to develop tailored, green job training programs; and (c) increased outreach efforts to target populations. Outreach efforts may be conducted in partnership with local workforce development councils.

3. The definitions in RCW 43.330.010 apply to this section.

\[ [2009 c 536 § 8](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/2009-10/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/House/2227-S2.SL.pdf?cite=2009%20c%20536%20§%208); \]

## 28C.18.180 - Lifelong learning program.
1. A lifelong learning program is established within the workforce training and education coordinating board to provide the opportunity for employees, with the support of their employers, to create educational savings accounts that may be used to fund approved education and training. In operating the program, the board:

    a.  May partner with, and coordinate the voluntary alignment of services with, financial institutions and other public, private, and nonprofit organizations in order to enable low-wage workers to attain high-skilled and high-wage jobs in their communities;

    b.  Must work with its partners to:

        i.  Establish the policies, rules, and procedures, including but not limited to standards for fund management and for approving career development plans and education and training, that support the operation of the program;

        ii.  Ensure the program is marketed to various geographic areas and industry sectors of the state, as well as to low-wage workers, their employers, and the communities in which they reside; and

        iii.  Help partners coordinate new career counseling services with existing online and other providers, including the state's WorkSource system;

    c.  May work with financial institutions to encourage their full engagement in:

        i.  The management functions of the program, including managing lifelong learning accounts for individual employers and their respective employees consistent with program requirements and guidelines;

        ii.  Adding value to the program through the provision of financial literacy and career counseling; and

        iii.  Aligning their activities under a consolidated partnership, which may include the designation of one fund manager to streamline the establishment and management of the program; and

    d.  May develop program policies and system options that will lead the program to become self-sustaining.

2. The definitions in this subsection apply throughout this section.

    a.  "Approved career development plan" means an employee's career development plan that is approved by the program managers and contains the necessary information to determine if expenditures are in alignment with program criteria.

    b.  "Approved education and training" means education, training, and associated costs aligned with an approved career development plan and thus eligible to be funded from a lifelong learning account.

    c.  "Financial institution" means any federally chartered or state chartered bank, savings bank, or savings and loan association, or credit union.

    d.  "Lifelong learning accounts" means joint savings accounts that are established by employees and employers to support the education and training of employees and that are aligned with their approved career development plan.

\[ [2012 c 33 § 2](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/2011-12/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/Senate/6141.SL.pdf?cite=2012%20c%2033%20§%202); \]

## 28C.18.190 - Aerospace and advanced materials manufacturing—Program review—Analysis of training system.
1. By September 1, 2012, and each September 1st thereafter, the workforce training and education coordinating board, working with the state board for community and technical colleges, shall evaluate the programs recommended for review by the aerospace and advanced materials manufacturing pipeline advisory committee under RCW 28B.50.903. This evaluation shall include the outcome results both for the persons receiving the training and the employers.

2. By September 1, 2016, and every four years thereafter, the workforce training and education coordinating board shall conduct and complete an analysis of the results of the training system for aerospace and advanced materials manufacturing. This analysis shall include but not be limited to a specific net-impact and cost-benefit evaluation of the training system for the aerospace and advanced materials manufacturing industry and the outcome results both for the persons receiving the training and the employers.

3. All requirements in this section are subject to the availability of amounts appropriated for the specific purposes described.

\[ [2012 c 50 § 3](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/2011-12/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/House/2156-S2.SL.pdf?cite=2012%20c%2050%20§%203); \]

## **28C.18.200 - Workforce education investment accountability and oversight board.**
1. The workforce education investment accountability and oversight board is established. The board consists of seventeen members, as provided in this subsection:

    a. Four members of the legislature consisting of the chairs and ranking minority members of the respective higher education and workforce development committees of the senate and house of representatives, ex officio; and

    b. The following members appointed by the governor with the consent of the senate:

        i. Five members representing the businesses described in RCW 82.04.299 or subject to the tax rate under RCW 82.04.290(2)(a)(i);

        ii. Two members representing labor organizations, one of which must have expertise in registered apprenticeships and training a high-demand workforce and one of which must represent faculty at the four-year institutions of higher education;

        iii. Two members representing the institutions of higher education, as defined in RCW 28B.10.016, one of which must be from the four-year sector and one of which must be from the community and technical college sector;

        iv. Two members representing students, one of which must be a community and technical college student;

    v. One member representing the independent, not-for-profit higher education institutions; and

    vi. One member representing the student achievement council, established under **this** chapter .

2. Except for ex officio and student members, board members shall hold their offices for a term of three years until their successors are appointed. Student board members shall hold one-year terms.

3. The board shall have two cochairs. One cochair shall be one of the chairs of the respective higher education and workforce development committees of the legislature and the other cochair shall be one of the board members representing the businesses described in RCW 82.04.299 or subject to the tax rate under RCW 82.04.290(2)(a)(i). The cochairs shall hold the position for a one-year term. The board members shall elect the cochairs annually.

4. Nine voting members of the board constitute a quorum for the transaction of business. The board shall meet four times a year.

5. Staff support for the board shall be provided by the **student achievement council** established in this chapter.

6. The purposes of the board are to:

    a. Provide guidance and recommendations to the legislature on what workforce education priorities should be funded with the workforce education investment account; and

    b. Ensure accountability that the workforce education investments funded with the workforce education investment account are producing the intended results and are effectively increasing student success and career readiness, such as by increasing retention, completion, and job placement rates.

7. The board shall consult data from the education data center established under RCW 43.41.400 and the workforce training and education coordinating board established under this chapter when reviewing and determining whether workforce education investments funded from the workforce education investment account are effectively increasing student success and career readiness. **The workforce training and education coordinating board shall maintain the workforce education investment accountability and oversight board data dashboard on a public-facing portal and work with the board to update and modify the data dashboard as new performance metrics are identified.**

8. The board shall report its recommendations to the appropriate committees of the legislature by August 1st of each year.

9. For the purposes of this section, "board" means the workforce education investment accountability and oversight board established in this section.
