# 10.25 - Jurisdiction and venue.
* [10.25.065 - Perjury outside the state.](#1025065---perjury-outside-the-state)
* [10.25.070 - Change of venue—Procedure.](#1025070---change-of-venueprocedure)
* [10.25.130 - Costs.](#1025130---costs)
* [10.25.140 - Change of venue by outside jury.](#1025140---change-of-venue-by-outside-jury)
## 10.25.065 - Perjury outside the state.
Perjury committed outside of the state of Washington in a statement, declaration, verification, or certificate authorized by chapter 5.50 RCW is punishable in the county in this state in which occurs the act, transaction, matter, action, or proceeding, in relation to which the statement, declaration, verification, or certification was given or made.

\[ [2019 c 232 § 11](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/2019-20/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/Senate/5017-S.SL.pdf?cite=2019%20c%20232%20§%2011); [1981 c 187 § 4](http://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1981c187.pdf?cite=1981%20c%20187%20§%204); \]

## 10.25.070 - Change of venue—Procedure.
The defendant may show to the court, by affidavit, that he or she believes he or she cannot receive a fair trial in the county where the action is pending, owing to the prejudice of the judge, or to excitement or prejudice against the defendant in the county or some part thereof, and may thereupon demand to be tried in another county. The application shall not be granted on the ground of excitement or prejudice other than prejudice of the judge, unless the affidavit of the defendant be supported by other evidence, nor in any case unless the judge is satisfied the ground upon which the application is made does exist.

\[ [2010 c 8 § 1017](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/2009-10/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/Senate/6239-S.SL.pdf?cite=2010%20c%208%20§%201017); [1891 c 28 § 7](http://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1891c28.pdf?cite=1891%20c%2028%20§%207); Code 1881 § 1072; [1854 p 117 § 98](http://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/Pages/session_laws.aspx?cite=1854%20p%20117%20§%2098); RRS § 2018; \]

## 10.25.130 - Costs.
When a criminal case is transferred to another county pursuant to this chapter the county from which such case is transferred shall pay to the county in which the case is tried all costs accrued for per diem and mileage for jurors and witnesses and all other costs properly charged to a convicted defendant.

\[ [1961 c 303 § 2](http://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1961c303.pdf?cite=1961%20c%20303%20§%202); \]

## 10.25.140 - Change of venue by outside jury.
When a change of venue is ordered and the court, upon motion to transfer a jury or in the absence of such motion, determines that it would be more economical to move the jury than to move the pending action and that justice will be served, a change of venue shall be accomplished by the selection of a jury in the county to which the venue would otherwise have been transferred and the selected jury moved to the county where the indictment or information was filed.

\[ [1981 c 205 § 1](http://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1981c205.pdf?cite=1981%20c%20205%20§%201); \]

