# 10.92 - Tribal police officers.
* [10.92.010 - Definitions.](#1092010---definitions)
* [10.92.020 - Powers—Authority to act as general authority Washington peace officer—Public liability and property damage insurance—Training requirements—Issuance of citation, notice of infraction, or incident report—Jurisdiction—Civil liability—Sovereign tribal governments—Interlocal agreement.](#1092020---powersauthority-to-act-as-general-authority-washington-peace-officerpublic-liability-and-property-damage-insurancetraining-requirementsissuance-of-citation-notice-of-infraction-or-incident-reportjurisdictioncivil-liabilitysovereign-tribal-governmentsinterlocal-agreement)
## 10.92.010 - Definitions.
The definitions in this section apply throughout this chapter unless the context clearly requires otherwise.

1. "General authority Washington peace officer" means an officer authorized to enforce the criminal and traffic laws of the state of Washington generally.

2. "Tribal police officer" means any person in the employ of one of the federally recognized sovereign tribal governments, whose traditional lands and territories lie within the borders of the state of Washington, to enforce the criminal laws of that government.

\[ [2008 c 224 § 1](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/2007-08/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/House/2476.SL.pdf?cite=2008%20c%20224%20§%201); \]

## 10.92.020 - Powers—Authority to act as general authority Washington peace officer—Public liability and property damage insurance—Training requirements—Issuance of citation, notice of infraction, or incident report—Jurisdiction—Civil liability—Sovereign tribal governments—Interlocal agreement.
1. Tribal police officers under subsection (2) of this section shall be recognized and authorized to act as general authority Washington peace officers. A tribal police officer recognized and authorized to act as a general authority Washington peace officer under this section has the same powers as any other general authority Washington peace officer to enforce state laws in Washington, including the power to make arrests for violations of state laws.

2. A tribal police officer may exercise the powers of law enforcement of a general authority Washington peace officer under this section, subject to the following:

    a. The appropriate sovereign tribal nation shall submit to the department of enterprise services proof of public liability and property damage insurance for vehicles operated by the peace officers and police professional liability insurance from a company licensed to sell insurance in the state. For purposes of determining adequacy of insurance liability, the sovereign tribal government must submit with the proof of liability insurance a copy of the interlocal agreement between the sovereign tribal government and the local governments that have shared jurisdiction under this chapter where such an agreement has been reached pursuant to subsection (10) of this section.

        i. Within the thirty days of receipt of the information from the sovereign tribal nation, the department of enterprise services shall either approve or reject the adequacy of insurance, giving consideration to the scope of the interlocal agreement. The adequacy of insurance under this chapter shall be subject to annual review by the department of enterprise services.

        ii. Each policy of insurance issued under this chapter must include a provision that the insurance shall be available to satisfy settlements or judgments arising from the tortious conduct of tribal police officers when acting in the capacity of a general authority Washington peace officer, and that to the extent of policy coverage neither the sovereign tribal nation nor the insurance carrier will raise a defense of sovereign immunity to preclude an action for damages under state or federal law, the determination of fault in a civil action, or the payment of a settlement or judgment arising from the tortious conduct.

    b. The appropriate sovereign tribal nation shall submit to the department of enterprise services proof of training requirements for each tribal police officer. To be authorized as a general authority Washington peace officer, a tribal police officer must successfully complete the requirements set forth under RCW 43.101.157. Any applicant not meeting the requirements for certification as a tribal police officer may not act as a general authority Washington peace officer under this chapter. The criminal justice training commission shall notify the department of enterprise services if:

        i. A tribal police officer authorized under this chapter as a general authority Washington state peace officer has been decertified pursuant to RCW 43.101.157; or

        ii. An appropriate sovereign tribal government is otherwise in noncompliance with RCW 43.101.157.

3. A copy of any citation or notice of infraction issued, or any incident report taken, by a tribal police officer acting in the capacity of a general authority Washington peace officer as authorized by this chapter must be submitted within three days to the police chief or sheriff within whose jurisdiction the action was taken. Any citation issued under this chapter shall be to a Washington court, except that any citation issued to Indians within the exterior boundaries of an Indian reservation may be cited to a tribal court. Any arrest made or citation issued not in compliance with this chapter is not enforceable.

4. Any authorization granted under this chapter shall not in any way expand the jurisdiction of any tribal court or other tribal authority.

5. The authority granted under this chapter shall be coextensive with the exterior boundaries of the reservation, except that an officer commissioned under this section may act as authorized under RCW 10.93.070 beyond the exterior boundaries of the reservation.

6. For purposes of civil liability under this chapter, a tribal police officer shall not be considered an employee of the state of Washington or any local government except where a state or local government has deputized a tribal police officer as a specially commissioned officer. Neither the state of Washington and its individual employees nor any local government and its individual employees shall be liable for the authorization of tribal police officers under this chapter, nor for the negligence or other misconduct of tribal officers. The authorization of tribal police officers under this chapter shall not be deemed to have been a nondelegable duty of the state of Washington or any local government.

7. Nothing in this chapter impairs or affects the existing status and sovereignty of those sovereign tribal governments whose traditional lands and territories lie within the borders of the state of Washington as established under the laws of the United States.

8. Nothing in this chapter limits, impairs, or nullifies the authority of a county sheriff to appoint duly commissioned state or federally certified tribal police officers as deputy sheriffs authorized to enforce the criminal and traffic laws of the state of Washington.

9. Nothing in this chapter limits, impairs, or otherwise affects the existing authority under state or federal law of state or local law enforcement officers to enforce state law within the exterior boundaries of an Indian reservation or to enter Indian country in fresh pursuit, as defined in RCW 10.93.120, of a person suspected of violating state law, where the officer would otherwise not have jurisdiction.

10. An interlocal agreement pursuant to chapter 39.34 RCW is required between the sovereign tribal government and all local government law enforcement agencies that will have shared jurisdiction under this chapter prior to authorization taking effect under this chapter. Nothing in this chapter shall limit, impair, or otherwise affect the implementation of an interlocal agreement completed pursuant to chapter 39.34 RCW by July 1, 2008, between a sovereign tribal government and a local government law enforcement agency for cooperative law enforcement.

    a. Sovereign tribal governments that meet all of the requirements of subsection (2) of this section, but do not have an interlocal agreement pursuant to chapter 39.34 RCW and seek authorization under this chapter, may submit proof of liability insurance and training certification to the department of enterprise services. Upon confirmation of receipt of the information from the department of enterprise services, the sovereign tribal government and the local government law enforcement agencies that will have shared jurisdiction under this chapter have one year to enter into an interlocal agreement pursuant to chapter 39.34 RCW. If the sovereign tribal government and the local government law enforcement agencies that will have shared jurisdiction under this chapter are not able to reach agreement after one year, the sovereign tribal governments and the local government law enforcement agencies shall submit to binding arbitration pursuant to chapter 7.04A RCW with the American arbitration association or successor agency for purposes of completing an agreement prior to authorization going into effect.

    b. For the purposes of (a) of this subsection, those sovereign tribal government and local government law enforcement agencies that must enter into binding arbitration shall submit to last best offer arbitration. For purposes of accepting a last best offer, the arbitrator must consider other interlocal agreements between sovereign tribal governments and local law enforcement agencies in Washington state, any model policy developed by the Washington association of sheriffs and police chiefs or successor agency, and national best practices.

\[ [2011 1st sp.s. c 43 § 519](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/2011-12/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/Senate/5931-S.SL.pdf?cite=2011%201st%20sp.s.%20c%2043%20§%20519); [2008 c 224 § 2](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/2007-08/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/House/2476.SL.pdf?cite=2008%20c%20224%20§%202); \]

