# 35.14 - Community municipal corporations.
* [35.14.010 - When community municipal corporation may be organized—Service areas—Territory.](#3514010---when-community-municipal-corporation-may-be-organizedservice-areasterritory)
* [35.14.020 - Community council—Membership—Election—Terms.](#3514020---community-councilmembershipelectionterms)
* [35.14.030 - Community council—Employees—Office—Officers—Quorum—Meetings—Compensation and expenses.](#3514030---community-councilemployeesofficeofficersquorummeetingscompensation-and-expenses)
* [35.14.040 - Ordinances or resolutions of city applying to land, buildings or structures within corporation, effectiveness—Zoning ordinances, resolutions or land use controls to remain in effect upon annexation or consolidation—Comprehensive plan.](#3514040---ordinances-or-resolutions-of-city-applying-to-land-buildings-or-structures-within-corporation-effectivenesszoning-ordinances-resolutions-or-land-use-controls-to-remain-in-effect-upon-annexation-or-consolidationcomprehensive-plan)
* [35.14.050 - Powers and duties of community municipal corporation.](#3514050---powers-and-duties-of-community-municipal-corporation)
* [35.14.060 - Original term of existence of community municipal corporation—Continuation of existence—Procedure.](#3514060---original-term-of-existence-of-community-municipal-corporationcontinuation-of-existenceprocedure)
## 35.14.010 - When community municipal corporation may be organized—Service areas—Territory.
Whenever unincorporated territory is annexed by a city or town pursuant to the provisions of chapter 35.13 RCW, or whenever unincorporated territory is annexed to a code city pursuant to the provisions of chapter 35A.14 RCW, community municipal corporations may be organized for the territory comprised of all or a part of an unincorporated area annexed to a city or town pursuant to chapter 35.13 or 35A.14 RCW, if: (1) The service area is such as would be eligible for incorporation as a city or town; or (2) the service area has a minimum population of not less than three hundred inhabitants and ten percent of the population of the annexing city or town; or (3) the service area has a minimum population of not less than one thousand inhabitants.

Whenever two or more cities are consolidated pursuant to the provisions of chapter 35.10 RCW, a community municipal corporation may be organized within one or more of the consolidating cities.

No territory shall be included in the service area of more than one community municipal corporation. Whenever a new community municipal corporation is formed embracing all of the territory of an existing community municipal corporation, the prior existing community municipal corporation shall be deemed to be dissolved on the effective date of the new corporation.

\[ [1993 c 75 § 1](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/1993-94/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/House/1143.SL.pdf?cite=1993%20c%2075%20§%201); [1985 c 281 § 24](http://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1985c281.pdf?cite=1985%20c%20281%20§%2024); [1967 c 73 § 1](http://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1967c73.pdf?cite=1967%20c%2073%20§%201); \]

## 35.14.020 - Community council—Membership—Election—Terms.
A community municipal corporation shall be governed by a community council composed of five members. Initial councilmembers shall be elected concurrently with the annexation election to consecutively numbered positions from qualified electors residing within the service area. Declarations of candidacy and withdrawals shall be in the same manner as is provided for members of the city council or other legislative body of the city to which annexation is proposed. Subsequent council membership shall be the same in number as the initial council and such members shall be elected to consecutively numbered positions at the continuation election pursuant to RCW 35.14.060 from qualified electors residing within the service area.

 Terms of original councilmembers shall be coexistent with the original term of existence of the community municipal corporation and until their successors are elected and qualified. Vacancies in any council shall be filled for the remainder of the unexpired term by a majority vote of the remaining members.

\[ [1985 c 281 § 25](http://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1985c281.pdf?cite=1985%20c%20281%20§%2025); [1967 c 73 § 2](http://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1967c73.pdf?cite=1967%20c%2073%20§%202); \]

## 35.14.030 - Community council—Employees—Office—Officers—Quorum—Meetings—Compensation and expenses.
Each community council shall be staffed by a deputy to the city clerk of the city with which the service area is consolidated or annexed and shall be provided with such other clerical and technical assistance and a properly equipped office as may be necessary to carry out its functions.

Each community council shall elect a chair and vice chair from its membership. A majority of the council shall constitute a quorum. Each action of the community municipal corporation shall be by resolution approved by vote of the majority of all the members of the community council. Meetings shall be held at such times and places as provided in the rules of the community council. Members of the community council shall receive no compensation.

The necessary expenses of the community council shall be budgeted and paid by the city.

\[ [2009 c 549 § 2012](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/2009-10/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/Senate/5038.SL.pdf?cite=2009%20c%20549%20§%202012); [1967 c 73 § 3](http://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1967c73.pdf?cite=1967%20c%2073%20§%203); \]

## 35.14.040 - Ordinances or resolutions of city applying to land, buildings or structures within corporation, effectiveness—Zoning ordinances, resolutions or land use controls to remain in effect upon annexation or consolidation—Comprehensive plan.
The adoption, approval, enactment, amendment, granting or authorization by the city council or commission of any ordinance or resolution applying to land, buildings or structures within any community council corporation shall become effective within such community municipal corporation either on approval by the community council, or by failure of the community council to disapprove within sixty days of final enactment, with respect to the following:

1. Comprehensive plan;

2. Zoning ordinance;

3. Conditional use permit, special exception or variance;

4. Subdivision ordinance;

5. Subdivision plat;

6. Planned unit development.

Disapproval by the community council shall not affect the application of any ordinance or resolution affecting areas outside the community municipal corporation.

Upon annexation or consolidation, pending the effective enactment or amendment of a zoning or land use control ordinance, without disapproval of the community municipal corporation, affecting land, buildings, or structures within a community municipal corporation, the zoning ordinance, resolution or land use controls applicable to the annexed or consolidated area, prior to the annexation or consolidation, shall remain in effect within the community municipal corporation and be enforced by the city to which the area is annexed or consolidated.

Whenever the comprehensive plan of the city, insofar as it affects the area of the community municipal corporation has been submitted as part of an annexation proposition and approved by the voters of the area proposed for annexation pursuant to chapter 88, Laws of 1965 extraordinary session, such action shall have the same force and effect as approval by the community council of the comprehensive plan, zoning ordinance and subdivision ordinance.

\[ [1967 c 73 § 4](http://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1967c73.pdf?cite=1967%20c%2073%20§%204); \]

## 35.14.050 - Powers and duties of community municipal corporation.
In addition to powers and duties relating to approval of zoning regulations and restrictions as set forth in RCW 35.14.040, a community municipal corporation acting through its community council may:

1. Make recommendations concerning any proposed comprehensive plan or other proposal which directly or indirectly affects the use of property or land within the service area;

2. Provide a forum for consideration of the conservation, improvement or development of property or land within the service area; and

3. Advise, consult, and cooperate with the legislative authority of the city on any local matters directly or indirectly affecting the service area.

\[ [1967 c 73 § 5](http://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1967c73.pdf?cite=1967%20c%2073%20§%205); \]

## 35.14.060 - Original term of existence of community municipal corporation—Continuation of existence—Procedure.
The original terms of existence of any community municipal corporation shall be for at least four years and until the first Monday in January next following a regular municipal election held in the city.

Any such community municipal corporation may be continued thereafter for additional periods of four years' duration with the approval of the voters at an election held and conducted in the manner provided for in this section.

Authorization for a community municipal corporation to continue its term of existence for each additional period of four years may be initiated pursuant to a resolution or a petition in the following manner:

1. A resolution praying for such continuation may be adopted by the community council and shall be filed not less than seven months prior to the end of the term of existence of such corporation with the city council or other legislative body of the city in which the service area is located.

2. A petition for continuation shall be signed by at least ten percent of the registered voters residing within the service area and shall be filed not less than six months prior to the end of the term of existence of such corporation with the city council or other legislative body of the city in which the service area is located.

At the same election at which a proposition is submitted to the voters of the service area for the continuation of the community municipal corporation for an additional period of four years, the community councilmembers of such municipal corporation shall be elected. The positions on such council shall be the same in number as the original or initial council and shall be numbered consecutively and elected at large. Declarations of candidacy and withdrawals shall be in the same manner as is provided for members of the city council or other legislative body of the city.

Upon receipt of a petition, the city clerk shall examine the signatures thereon and certify to the sufficiency thereof. No person may withdraw his or her name from a petition after it has been filed.

Upon receipt of a valid resolution or upon duly certifying a petition for continuation of a community municipal corporation, the city clerk with whom the resolution or petition was filed shall cause a proposition on continuation of the term of existence of the community municipal corporation to be placed on the ballot at the next city general election. No person shall be eligible to vote on such proposition at such election unless he or she is a qualified voter and resident of the service area.

The ballots shall contain the words "For continuation of community municipal corporation" and "Against continuation of community municipal corporation" or words equivalent thereto, and shall also contain the names of the candidates to be voted for to fill the positions on the community council. The names of all candidates to be voted upon shall be printed on the ballot alphabetically in groups under the numbered position on the council for which they are candidates.

If the results of the election as certified by the county canvassing board reveal that a majority of the votes cast are for continuation, the municipal corporation shall continue in existence for an additional period of four years, and certificates of election shall be issued to the successful candidates who shall assume office at the same time as members of the city council or other legislative body of the city.

\[ [2009 c 549 § 2013](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/2009-10/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/Senate/5038.SL.pdf?cite=2009%20c%20549%20§%202013); [1967 c 73 § 6](http://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1967c73.pdf?cite=1967%20c%2073%20§%206); \]

