# 35.80A - Condemnation of blighted property.
* [35.80A.010 - Condemnation of blighted property.](#3580a010---condemnation-of-blighted-property)
* [35.80A.020 - Transfer of blighted property acquired by condemnation.](#3580a020---transfer-of-blighted-property-acquired-by-condemnation)
* [35.80A.030 - Disposition of blighted property—Procedures.](#3580a030---disposition-of-blighted-propertyprocedures)
* [35.80A.040 - Authority to enter blighted buildings or property—Acceptance of financial assistance.](#3580a040---authority-to-enter-blighted-buildings-or-propertyacceptance-of-financial-assistance)
## 35.80A.010 - Condemnation of blighted property.
Every county, city, and town may acquire by condemnation, in accordance with the notice requirements and other procedures for condemnation provided in Title 8 RCW, any property, dwelling, building, or structure which constitutes a blight on the surrounding neighborhood. A "blight on the surrounding neighborhood" is any property, dwelling, building, or structure that meets any two of the following factors: (1) If a dwelling, building, or structure exists on the property, the dwelling, building, or structure has not been lawfully occupied for a period of one year or more; (2) the property, dwelling, building, or structure constitutes a threat to the public health, safety, or welfare as determined by the executive authority of the county, city, or town, or the designee of the executive authority; or (3) the property, dwelling, building, or structure is or has been associated with illegal drug activity during the previous twelve months. Prior to such condemnation, the local governing body shall adopt a resolution declaring that the acquisition of the real property described therein is necessary to eliminate neighborhood blight. Condemnation of property, dwellings, buildings, and structures for the purposes described in this chapter is declared to be for a public use.

\[ [1994 c 175 § 1](https://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/1993-94/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/House/2628-S.SL.pdf?cite=1994%20c%20175%20§%201); [1989 c 271 § 239](https://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1989c271.pdf?cite=1989%20c%20271%20§%20239); \]

## 35.80A.020 - Transfer of blighted property acquired by condemnation.
Counties, cities, and towns may sell, lease, or otherwise transfer real property acquired pursuant to this chapter for residential, recreational, commercial, industrial, or other uses or for public use, subject to such covenants, conditions, and restrictions, including covenants running with the land, as the county, city, or town deems to be necessary or desirable to rehabilitate and preserve the dwelling, building, or structure in a habitable condition. The purchasers or lessees and their successors and assigns shall be obligated to comply with such other requirements as the county, city, or town may determine to be in the public interest, including the obligation to begin, within a reasonable time, any improvements on such property required to make the dwelling, building, or structure habitable. Such real property or interest shall be sold, leased, or otherwise transferred, at not less than its fair market value. In determining the fair market value of real property for uses in accordance with this section, a municipality shall take into account and give consideration to, the restrictions upon and the covenants, conditions, and obligations assumed by the purchaser or lessee.

\[ [1989 c 271 § 240](https://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1989c271.pdf?cite=1989%20c%20271%20§%20240); \]

## 35.80A.030 - Disposition of blighted property—Procedures.
A county, city, or town may dispose of real property acquired pursuant to this section to private persons only under such reasonable, competitive procedures as it shall prescribe. The county, city, or town may accept such proposals as it deems to be in the public interest and in furtherance of the purposes of this chapter. Thereafter, the county, city, or town may execute and deliver contracts, deeds, leases, and other instruments of transfer.

\[ [1989 c 271 § 241](https://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1989c271.pdf?cite=1989%20c%20271%20§%20241); \]

## 35.80A.040 - Authority to enter blighted buildings or property—Acceptance of financial assistance.
Every county, city, or town may, in addition to any other authority granted by this chapter: (1) Enter upon any building or property found to constitute a blight on the surrounding neighborhood in order to make surveys and appraisals, and to obtain an order for this purpose from a court of competent jurisdiction in the event entry is denied or resisted; and (2) borrow money, apply for, and accept, advances, loans, grants, contributions, and any other form of financial assistance from the federal government, the state, a county, or other public body, or from any sources, public or private, for the purposes of this chapter, and enter into and carry out contracts in connection herewith.

\[ [1989 c 271 § 242](https://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1989c271.pdf?cite=1989%20c%20271%20§%20242); \]

