# 35.36 - Execution of bonds by proxy—First-class cities.
* [35.36.010 - Appointment of proxies.](#3536010---appointment-of-proxies)
* [35.36.020 - Coupons—Printing facsimile signatures.](#3536020---couponsprinting-facsimile-signatures)
* [35.36.030 - Deputies—Exemptions.](#3536030---deputiesexemptions)
* [35.36.040 - Designation of bonds to be signed.](#3536040---designation-of-bonds-to-be-signed)
* [35.36.050 - Liability of officer.](#3536050---liability-of-officer)
* [35.36.060 - Notice to council.](#3536060---notice-to-council)
* [35.36.070 - Revocation of proxy.](#3536070---revocation-of-proxy)
## 35.36.010 - Appointment of proxies.
The mayor, city comptroller and city clerk of every city of the first class may each severally designate one or more bonded persons to affix his or her signature to any bond or bonds requiring his or her signature.

If the signature of one of these officers is affixed to a bond during his or her continuance in office by a proxy designated by him or her whose authority has not been revoked, the bond shall be as binding upon the city and all concerned as though the officer had signed the bond in person.

This chapter shall apply to all bonds, whether they constitute obligations of the city as a whole or of any local improvement or other district or subdivision thereof, whether they call for payment from the general funds of the city or from a local, special or other fund, and whether negotiable or otherwise.

\[ [2009 c 549 § 2071](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/2009-10/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/Senate/5038.SL.pdf?cite=2009%20c%20549%20§%202071); [1965 c 7 § 35.36.010](http://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1965c7.pdf?cite=1965%20c%207%20§%2035.36.010); [1929 c 212 § 1](http://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1929c212.pdf?cite=1929%20c%20212%20§%201); RRS § 9005-5; \]

## 35.36.020 - Coupons—Printing facsimile signatures.
A facsimile reproduction of the signature of the mayor, city comptroller, or city clerk in every city of the first class may be printed, engraved, or lithographed upon bond coupons with the same effect as though the particular officer had signed the coupon in person.

\[ [1965 c 7 § 35.36.020](http://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1965c7.pdf?cite=1965%20c%207%20§%2035.36.020); [1929 c 212 § 4](http://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1929c212.pdf?cite=1929%20c%20212%20§%204); RRS § 9005-8; \]

## 35.36.030 - Deputies—Exemptions.
Nothing in this chapter shall be construed as requiring the appointment of deputy comptrollers or deputy city clerks in first-class cities to be made in accordance herewith so far as concerns signatures or other doings which may be lawfully made or done by such deputy under the provisions of any other law.

\[ [1965 c 7 § 35.36.030](http://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1965c7.pdf?cite=1965%20c%207%20§%2035.36.030); [1929 c 212 § 5](http://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1929c212.pdf?cite=1929%20c%20212%20§%205); RRS § 9005-9; \]

## 35.36.040 - Designation of bonds to be signed.
1. The officer whose duty it is to cause any bonds to be printed, engraved, or lithographed, shall specify in a written order or requisition to the printer, engraver, or lithographer the number of bonds to be printed, engraved, or lithographed and the manner of numbering them.

2. Every printer, engraver, or lithographer who prints, engraves, or lithographs a greater number of bonds than that specified or who prints, engraves, or lithographs more than one bond bearing the same number is guilty of a class B felony punishable according to chapter 9A.20 RCW.

\[ [2003 c 53 § 199](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/2003-04/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/Senate/5758.SL.pdf?cite=2003%20c%2053%20§%20199); [1965 c 7 § 35.36.040](http://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1965c7.pdf?cite=1965%20c%207%20§%2035.36.040); [1929 c 212 § 6](http://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1929c212.pdf?cite=1929%20c%20212%20§%206); RRS § 9005-10; \]

## 35.36.050 - Liability of officer.
A mayor, comptroller, or clerk authorizing the affixing of his or her signature to a bond by a proxy shall be subject to the same liability personally and on his or her bond for any signature so affixed and to the same extent as if he or she had affixed his or her signature in person.

\[ [2009 c 549 § 2072](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/2009-10/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/Senate/5038.SL.pdf?cite=2009%20c%20549%20§%202072); [1965 c 7 § 35.36.050](http://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1965c7.pdf?cite=1965%20c%207%20§%2035.36.050); [1929 c 212 § 3](http://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1929c212.pdf?cite=1929%20c%20212%20§%203); RRS § 9005-7; \]

## 35.36.060 - Notice to council.
In order to designate a proxy to affix his or her signature to bonds, a mayor, comptroller, or clerk shall address a written notice to the governing body of the city giving the name of the person whom he or she has selected therefor and stating generally or specifically what bonds are to be so signed.

Attached to or included in the notice shall be a written signature of the officer making the designation executed by the proposed proxy followed by the word "by" and his or her own signature; or, if the notice so states, the specimen signatures may consist of a facsimile reproduction of the officer's signature impressed by some mechanical process followed by the word "by" and the proxy's own signature.

If the authority is intended to include the signature upon bonds bearing an earlier date than the effective date of the notice, the prior dated bonds must be specifically described by reasonable reference thereto.

The notice designating a proxy shall be filed with the city comptroller or city clerk, together with the specimen signatures attached thereto and a record of the filing shall be made in the journal of the governing body. This record shall note the date and hour of filing and may be made by the official who keeps the journal at any time after filing of the notice, even during a period of recess or adjournment of the governing body. The notice shall be effective from the time of its recording.

\[ [2009 c 549 § 2073](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/2009-10/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/Senate/5038.SL.pdf?cite=2009%20c%20549%20§%202073); [1965 c 7 § 35.36.060](http://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1965c7.pdf?cite=1965%20c%207%20§%2035.36.060); 1929 c 212 § 2, part; RRS § 9005-6, part; \]

## 35.36.070 - Revocation of proxy.
Any designation of a proxy may be revoked by written notice addressed to the governing body of the city signed by the officer who made the designation and filed and recorded in the same manner as the notice of designation. It shall be effective from the time of its recording but shall not affect the validity of any signature theretofore made.

\[ [1965 c 7 § 35.36.070](http://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1965c7.pdf?cite=1965%20c%207%20§%2035.36.070); 1929 c 212 § 2, part; RRS § 9005-6, part; \]

