[wa-law.org](/) > [bill](/bill/) > [2023-24](/bill/2023-24/) > [SB 5142](/bill/2023-24/sb/5142/) > [Passed Legislature](/bill/2023-24/sb/5142/S.PL/)

# SB 5142 - HIV medication rebate rev.

[Source](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/2023-24/Pdf/Bills/Senate%20Passed%20Legislature/5142-S.PL.pdf)

## Section 1
The medication for people living with HIV rebate revenue account is created in the custody of the state treasury. The early intervention program shall deposit any receipts from pharmaceutical rebates generated by the purchase of medications with federal grant funds and revenue generated from federal grant funds for any person enrolled in the early intervention program into the account. The expenditures may only be used for services defined in the grant award from the Ryan White HIV/AIDS program. Only the secretary or the secretary's designee may authorize expenditures from the account. An appropriation is not required for expenditures. The account is subject to allotment procedures under chapter 43.88 RCW.

## Section 2
(1) Money in the treasurer's trust fund may be deposited, invested, and reinvested by the state treasurer in accordance with RCW 43.84.080 in the same manner and to the same extent as if the money were in the state treasury, and may be commingled with moneys in the state treasury for cash management and cash balance purposes.

## Section 3
This act is necessary for the immediate preservation of the public peace, health, or safety, or support of the state government and its existing public institutions, and takes effect July 1, 2023.
