# 44.28 - Joint legislative audit and review committee.
* [44.28.005 - Definitions.](#4428005---definitions)
* [44.28.010 - Committee created—Members.](#4428010---committee-createdmembers)
* [44.28.020 - Terms of members—Vacancies.](#4428020---terms-of-membersvacancies)
* [44.28.040 - Travel expenses.](#4428040---travel-expenses)
* [44.28.050 - Expenses of committee—Vouchers.](#4428050---expenses-of-committeevouchers)
* [44.28.055 - Administration.](#4428055---administration)
* [44.28.060 - Executive committee—Legislative auditor—Rules, subcommittees.](#4428060---executive-committeelegislative-auditorrules-subcommittees)
* [44.28.065 - Legislative auditor—Duties.](#4428065---legislative-auditorduties)
* [44.28.071 - Conduct of performance audits.](#4428071---conduct-of-performance-audits)
* [44.28.075 - Performance audits—Scope.](#4428075---performance-auditsscope)
* [44.28.076 - Racial equity analysis.](#4428076---racial-equity-analysis)
* [44.28.080 - Powers—Appropriations, expenses, revenues.](#4428080---powersappropriations-expenses-revenues)
* [44.28.083 - Performance audit work plans.](#4428083---performance-audit-work-plans)
* [44.28.088 - Performance audit reports—Preliminary, final.](#4428088---performance-audit-reportspreliminary-final)
* [44.28.091 - Compliance reports—Preliminary and final.](#4428091---compliance-reportspreliminary-and-final)
* [44.28.094 - Quality control review of joint committee.](#4428094---quality-control-review-of-joint-committee)
* [44.28.097 - Agency and local government reports furnished to joint committee.](#4428097---agency-and-local-government-reports-furnished-to-joint-committee)
* [44.28.100 - Reports, minutes.](#4428100---reports-minutes)
* [44.28.110 - Examinations—Subpoenas—Depositions—Access to confidential records.](#4428110---examinationssubpoenasdepositionsaccess-to-confidential-records)
* [44.28.120 - Contempt proceedings—Recalcitrant witnesses.](#4428120---contempt-proceedingsrecalcitrant-witnesses)
* [44.28.130 - Witness fees and mileage.](#4428130---witness-fees-and-mileage)
* [44.28.150 - Cooperation with legislative committees and others.](#4428150---cooperation-with-legislative-committees-and-others)
* [44.28.155 - WorkFirst program evaluation.](#4428155---workfirst-program-evaluation)
* [44.28.156 - Education performance agreement pilot—Evaluation.](#4428156---education-performance-agreement-pilotevaluation)
* [44.28.157 - School district health benefits—Review—Recommendations—Performance grants—Report.](#4428157---school-district-health-benefitsreviewrecommendationsperformance-grantsreport)
* [44.28.190 - Review of increased density bonus for affordable housing located on property owned by a religious organization.](#4428190---review-of-increased-density-bonus-for-affordable-housing-located-on-property-owned-by-a-religious-organization)
* [44.28.805 - Review of distributions to cities and counties—Report.](#4428805---review-of-distributions-to-cities-and-countiesreport)
* [44.28.810 - Review of governor's interagency coordinating council on health disparities—Report to the legislature.](#4428810---review-of-governors-interagency-coordinating-council-on-health-disparitiesreport-to-the-legislature)
* [44.28.812 - Review of impact fee deferral requirements. (Expires January 1, 2022.)](#4428812---review-of-impact-fee-deferral-requirements-expires-january-1-2022)
* [44.28.818 - Review of office of privacy and data protection. (Expires July 1, 2026.)](#4428818---review-of-office-of-privacy-and-data-protection-expires-july-1-2026)
* [44.28.900 - Severability—1951 c 43.](#4428900---severability1951-c-43)
## **44.28.005 - Definitions.**
Unless the context clearly requires otherwise, the definitions in this section apply throughout this chapter.

1. "Legislative auditor" means the executive officer of the joint legislative audit and review committee.

2. "Economy and efficiency audits" means performance audits that establish: (a) Whether a state agency or unit of local government receiving state funds is acquiring, protecting, and using its resources such as personnel, property, and space economically and efficiently; (b) the causes of inefficiencies or uneconomical practices; and (c) whether the state agency or local government has complied with significant laws and rules in acquiring, protecting, and using its resources.

3. **"Ethnic commissions" means the Washington state commission on African American affairs established in chapter 43.113 RCW, the Washington state commission on Asian Pacific American affairs established in chapter 43.117 RCW, and the Washington state commission on Hispanic affairs established in chapter 43.115 RCW.**

4. "Final compliance report" means a written document, as approved by the joint committee, that states the specific actions a state agency or unit of local government receiving state funds has taken to implement recommendations contained in the final performance audit report and the preliminary compliance report. Any recommendations, including proposed legislation and changes in the agency's rules and practices or the local government's practices, based on testimony received, must be included in the final compliance report.

5. "Final performance audit report" means a written document adopted by the joint legislative audit and review committee that contains the findings and proposed recommendations made in the preliminary performance audit report, the final recommendations adopted by the joint committee, any comments to the preliminary performance audit report by the joint committee, and any comments to the preliminary performance audit report by the state agency or local government that was audited.

6. "Joint committee" means the joint legislative audit and review committee.

7. "Local government" means a city, town, county, special purpose district, political subdivision, municipal corporation, or quasi-municipal corporation, including a public corporation created by such an entity.

8. "Performance audit" means an objective and systematic assessment of a state agency or any of its programs, functions, or activities, or a unit of local government receiving state funds, by an independent evaluator in order to help public officials improve efficiency, effectiveness, and accountability. Performance audits include economy and efficiency audits and program audits. A performance audit of a local government may only be made to determine whether the local government is using state funds for their intended purpose in an efficient and effective manner.

9. "Performance measures" are a composite of key indicators of a program's or activity's inputs, outputs, outcomes, productivity, timeliness, and/or quality. They are means of evaluating policies and programs by measuring results against agreed upon program goals or standards.

10. "Preliminary compliance report" means a written document that states the specific actions a state agency or unit of local government receiving state funds has taken to implement any recommendations contained in the final performance audit report.

11. "Preliminary performance audit report" means a written document prepared for review and comment by the joint legislative audit and review committee after the completion of a performance audit. The preliminary performance audit report must contain the audit findings and any proposed recommendations to improve the efficiency, effectiveness, or accountability of the state agency or local government audited.

12. "Program audits" means performance audits that determine: (a) The extent to which desired outcomes or results are being achieved; (b) the causes for not achieving intended outcomes or results; and (c) compliance with significant laws and rules applicable to the program.

13. "State agency" or "agency" means a state agency, department, office, officer, board, commission, bureau, division, institution, or institution of higher education. "State agency" includes all elective offices in the executive branch of state government.

## 44.28.010 - Committee created—Members.
The joint legislative audit and review committee is created, which shall consist of eight senators and eight representatives from the legislature. The senate members of the joint committee shall be appointed by the president of the senate, and the house members of the joint committee shall be appointed by the speaker of the house. Not more than four members from each house shall be from the same political party. Members shall be appointed before the close of each regular session of the legislature during an odd-numbered year.

\[ [2010 c 26 § 1](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/2009-10/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/House/2406.SL.pdf?cite=2010%20c%2026%20§%201); [1996 c 288 § 3](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/1995-96/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/House/2222-S2.SL.pdf?cite=1996%20c%20288%20§%203); [1983 c 52 § 1](http://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1983c52.pdf?cite=1983%20c%2052%20§%201); [1980 c 87 § 30](http://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1980c87.pdf?cite=1980%20c%2087%20§%2030); [1969 c 10 § 4](http://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1969c10.pdf?cite=1969%20c%2010%20§%204); [1967 ex.s. c 114 § 1](http://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1967ex1c114.pdf?cite=1967%20ex.s.%20c%20114%20§%201); [1963 ex.s. c 20 § 1](http://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1963ex1c20.pdf?cite=1963%20ex.s.%20c%2020%20§%201); [1955 c 206 § 4](http://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1955c206.pdf?cite=1955%20c%20206%20§%204); [1951 c 43 § 1](http://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1951c43.pdf?cite=1951%20c%2043%20§%201); \]

## 44.28.020 - Terms of members—Vacancies.
The term of office of the members of the joint committee shall be two years, ending two years from the date of appointment or when a member is no longer a member of the house from which he or she was appointed, except that members shall continue to serve until a successor is appointed. Vacancies on the joint committee shall be filled from the same political party and from the same house as the member whose seat was vacated. Senate vacancies shall be filled through appointment by the president of the senate, and house vacancies shall be filled through appointment by the speaker of the house.

\[ [2010 c 26 § 2](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/2009-10/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/House/2406.SL.pdf?cite=2010%20c%2026%20§%202); [1996 c 288 § 4](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/1995-96/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/House/2222-S2.SL.pdf?cite=1996%20c%20288%20§%204); [1980 c 87 § 31](http://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1980c87.pdf?cite=1980%20c%2087%20§%2031); [1969 c 10 § 5](http://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1969c10.pdf?cite=1969%20c%2010%20§%205); [1955 c 206 § 5](http://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1955c206.pdf?cite=1955%20c%20206%20§%205); [1951 c 43 § 12](http://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1951c43.pdf?cite=1951%20c%2043%20§%2012); \]

## 44.28.040 - Travel expenses.
The members of the joint committee shall serve without additional compensation, but shall be reimbursed for their travel expenses in accordance with RCW 44.04.120 for attending meetings of the joint committee or a subcommittee of the joint committee, or while engaged on other business authorized by the joint committee.

\[ [1996 c 288 § 6](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/1995-96/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/House/2222-S2.SL.pdf?cite=1996%20c%20288%20§%206); 1975-'76 2nd ex.s. c 34 § 134; [1951 c 43 § 14](http://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1951c43.pdf?cite=1951%20c%2043%20§%2014); \]

## 44.28.050 - Expenses of committee—Vouchers.
All expenses incurred by the committee, including salaries and expenses of employees, shall be paid upon voucher forms as provided by the auditor. The legislative auditor may be authorized by the *legislative budget committee's executive committee to sign vouchers. Such authorization shall specify a dollar limitation and be set out in writing. A monthly report of such vouchers shall be submitted to the executive committee. If authorization is not given to the legislative auditor then the chair, or the vice chair in the chair's absence, is authorized to sign vouchers. This authority shall continue until the chair's or vice chair's successors are selected after each ensuing session of the legislature. Vouchers may be drawn on funds appropriated generally by the legislature for legislative expenses or upon any special appropriation which may be provided by the legislature for the expenses of the committee or both.

\[ [1989 c 137 § 1](http://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1989c137.pdf?cite=1989%20c%20137%20§%201); [1955 c 206 § 7](http://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1955c206.pdf?cite=1955%20c%20206%20§%207); [1951 c 43 § 15](http://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1951c43.pdf?cite=1951%20c%2043%20§%2015); \]

## 44.28.055 - Administration.
The administration of the joint legislative audit and review committee is subject to RCW 44.04.260.

\[ [2001 c 259 § 2](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/2001-02/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/House/1391-S.SL.pdf?cite=2001%20c%20259%20§%202); \]

## 44.28.060 - Executive committee—Legislative auditor—Rules, subcommittees.
The members of the joint committee shall form an executive committee consisting of one member from each of the four major political caucuses, which shall include a chair and a vice chair. The chair and vice chair shall serve for a period not to exceed two years. The chair and the vice chair may not be members of the same political party. The chair shall alternate between the members of the majority parties in the senate and the house of representatives.

Subject to RCW 44.04.260, the executive committee is responsible for performing all general administrative and personnel duties assigned to it in the rules and procedures adopted by the joint committee, as well as other duties delegated to it by the joint committee. The executive committee shall recommend applicants for the position of the legislative auditor to the membership of the joint committee. The legislative auditor shall be hired with the approval of a majority of the membership of the joint committee. Subject to RCW 44.04.260, the executive committee shall set the salary of the legislative auditor.

The joint committee shall adopt rules and procedures for its orderly operation. The joint committee may create subcommittees to perform duties under this chapter.

\[ [2001 c 259 § 3](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/2001-02/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/House/1391-S.SL.pdf?cite=2001%20c%20259%20§%203); [1996 c 288 § 7](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/1995-96/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/House/2222-S2.SL.pdf?cite=1996%20c%20288%20§%207); [1975 1st ex.s. c 293 § 13](http://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1975ex1c293.pdf?cite=1975%201st%20ex.s.%20c%20293%20§%2013); [1951 c 43 § 2](http://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1951c43.pdf?cite=1951%20c%2043%20§%202); \]

## 44.28.065 - Legislative auditor—Duties.
The legislative auditor shall:

1. Establish and manage the office of the joint legislative audit and review committee to carry out the functions of this chapter;

2. Direct the audit and review functions described in this chapter and ensure that performance audits are performed in accordance with the "Government Auditing Standards" published by the comptroller general of the United States as applicable to the scope of the audit;

3. Make findings and recommendations to the joint committee and under its direction to the committees of the state legislature concerning the organization and operation of state agencies and the expenditure of state funds by units of local government;

4. Subject to RCW 44.04.260, in consultation with and with the approval of the executive committee, hire staff necessary to carry out the purposes of this chapter. Subject to RCW 44.04.260, employee salaries, other than the legislative auditor, shall be set by the legislative auditor with the approval of the executive committee;

5. Assist the several standing committees of the house and senate in consideration of legislation affecting state departments and their efficiency; appear before other legislative committees; and assist any other legislative committee upon instruction by the joint legislative audit and review committee;

6. Provide the legislature with information obtained under the direction of the joint legislative audit and review committee;

7. Maintain a record of all work performed by the legislative auditor under the direction of the joint legislative audit and review committee and keep and make available all documents, data, and reports submitted to the legislative auditor by any legislative committee.

\[ [2001 c 259 § 4](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/2001-02/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/House/1391-S.SL.pdf?cite=2001%20c%20259%20§%204); [1996 c 288 § 8](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/1995-96/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/House/2222-S2.SL.pdf?cite=1996%20c%20288%20§%208); [1975 1st ex.s. c 293 § 17](http://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1975ex1c293.pdf?cite=1975%201st%20ex.s.%20c%20293%20§%2017); [1955 c 206 § 9](http://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1955c206.pdf?cite=1955%20c%20206%20§%209); [1951 c 43 § 11](http://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1951c43.pdf?cite=1951%20c%2043%20§%2011); \]

## 44.28.071 - Conduct of performance audits.
1. In conducting performance audits and other reviews, the legislative auditor shall work closely with the chairs and staff of standing committees of the senate and house of representatives, and may work in consultation with the state auditor and the director of financial management.

2. The legislative auditor may contract with and consult with public and private independent professional and technical experts as necessary in conducting the performance audits. The legislative auditor should also involve frontline employees and internal auditors in the performance audit process to the highest possible degree.

3. The legislative auditor shall work with the legislative evaluation and accountability program committee and the office of financial management to develop information system capabilities necessary for the performance audit requirements of this chapter.

4. The legislative auditor shall work with the legislative office of performance review and the office of financial management to facilitate the implementation of effective performance measures throughout state government. In agencies and programs where effective systems for performance measurement exist, the measurements incorporated into those systems should be a basis for performance audits conducted under this chapter.

\[ [1996 c 288 § 9](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/1995-96/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/House/2222-S2.SL.pdf?cite=1996%20c%20288%20§%209); \]

## 44.28.075 - Performance audits—Scope.
1. Subject to the requirements of the performance audit work plan approved by the joint committee under RCW 44.28.083, performance audits may, in addition to the determinations that may be made in such an audit as specified in RCW 44.28.005, include the following:

    a. An examination of the costs and benefits of agency programs, functions, and activities;

    b. Identification of viable alternatives for reducing costs or improving service delivery;

    c. Identification of gaps and overlaps in service delivery, along with corrective action; and

    d. Comparison with other states whose agencies perform similar functions, as well as their relative funding levels and performance.

2. As part of a performance audit, the legislative auditor may review the costs of programs recently implemented by the legislature to compare actual agency costs with the appropriations provided and the cost estimates that were included in the fiscal note for the program at the time the program was enacted.

\[ [1996 c 288 § 10](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/1995-96/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/House/2222-S2.SL.pdf?cite=1996%20c%20288%20§%2010); \]

## 44.28.076 - Racial equity analysis.
The joint committee shall incorporate a racial equity analysis into performance audits, sunset reviews, and other audits or reports conducted by the joint committee. The joint committee shall note in its audits, reviews, and reports if a racial equity analysis is not necessary or appropriate. The joint committee may work with the office of equity, the governor's office of Indian affairs, the LGBTQ commission, the Washington state women's commission, and the ethnic commissions to design the racial equity analysis required under this section.

\[ [2021 c 310 § 1](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/2021-22/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/Senate/5405-S.SL.pdf?cite=2021%20c%20310%20§%201); \]

## 44.28.080 - Powers—Appropriations, expenses, revenues.
The joint committee has the following powers:

1. To make examinations and reports concerning whether or not appropriations are being expended for the purposes and within the statutory restrictions provided by the legislature; and concerning the organization and operation of procedures necessary or desirable to promote economy, efficiency, and effectiveness in state government, its officers, boards, committees, commissions, institutions, and other state agencies, and to make recommendations and reports to the legislature.

2. To make such other studies and examinations of economy, efficiency, and effectiveness of state government and its state agencies as it may find advisable, and to hear complaints, hold hearings, gather information, and make findings of fact with respect thereto.

3. To conduct program and fiscal reviews of any state agency or program scheduled for termination under the process provided under chapter 43.131 RCW.

4. To perform other legislative staff studies of state government or the use of state funds.

5. To conduct performance audits in accordance with the work plan adopted by the joint committee under *RCW 44.28.180.

6. To receive a copy of each report of examination or audit issued by the state auditor for examinations or audits that were conducted at the request of the joint committee and to make recommendations as it deems appropriate as a separate addendum to the report or audit.

7. To develop internal tracking procedures that will allow the legislature to measure the effectiveness of performance audits conducted by the joint committee including, where appropriate, measurements of cost-savings and increases in efficiency and effectiveness in how state agencies deliver their services.

8. To receive messages and reports in person or in writing from the governor or any other state officials and to study generally any and all business relating to economy, efficiency, and effectiveness in state government and state agencies.

\[ [1996 c 288 § 11](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/1995-96/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/House/2222-S2.SL.pdf?cite=1996%20c%20288%20§%2011); [1975 1st ex.s. c 293 § 14](http://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1975ex1c293.pdf?cite=1975%201st%20ex.s.%20c%20293%20§%2014); [1955 c 206 § 10](http://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1955c206.pdf?cite=1955%20c%20206%20§%2010); [1951 c 43 § 4](http://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1951c43.pdf?cite=1951%20c%2043%20§%204); \]

## 44.28.083 - Performance audit work plans.
1. At the conclusion of the regular legislative session of each odd-numbered year, the joint legislative audit and review committee shall develop and approve a performance audit work plan for the ensuing biennium. The biennial work plan may be modified, as necessary, at the conclusion of other legislative sessions to reflect actions taken by the legislature and the joint committee. The work plan shall include a description of each performance audit, and the cost of completing the audits on the work plan shall be limited to the funds appropriated to the joint committee. Approved performance audit work plans shall be transmitted to the entire legislature by July 1st following the conclusion of each regular session of an odd-numbered year and as soon as practical following other legislative sessions.

2. Among the factors to be considered in preparing the work plans are:

    a. Whether a program newly created or significantly altered by the legislature warrants continued oversight because (i) the fiscal impact of the program is significant, or (ii) the program represents a relatively high degree of risk in terms of reaching the stated goals and objectives for that program;

    b. Whether implementation of an existing program has failed to meet its goals and objectives by any significant degree; 

    c. Whether a follow-up audit would help ensure that previously identified recommendations for improvements were being implemented; and

    d. Whether an assignment for the joint committee to conduct a performance audit has been mandated in legislation.

3. The legislative auditor may consult with the chairs and staff of appropriate legislative committees, the state auditor, and the director of financial management in developing the performance audit work plan.

\[ [2010 c 26 § 3](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/2009-10/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/House/2406.SL.pdf?cite=2010%20c%2026%20§%203); [1996 c 288 § 12](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/1995-96/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/House/2222-S2.SL.pdf?cite=1996%20c%20288%20§%2012); [1993 c 406 § 5](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/1993-94/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/House/1372-S.SL.pdf?cite=1993%20c%20406%20§%205); \]

## 44.28.088 - Performance audit reports—Preliminary, final.
1. When the legislative auditor has completed a performance audit authorized in the performance audit work plan, the legislative auditor shall transmit the preliminary performance audit report to the affected state agency or local government and the office of financial management for comment. The agency or local government and the office of financial management shall provide any response to the legislative auditor within thirty days after receipt of the preliminary performance audit report unless a different time period is approved by the joint committee. The legislative auditor shall incorporate the response of the agency or local government and the office of financial management into the final performance audit report.

2. Before releasing the results of a performance audit to the legislature or the public, the legislative auditor shall submit the preliminary performance audit report to the joint committee for its review, comments, and final recommendations. Any comments by the joint committee must be included as a separate addendum to the final performance audit report. Upon consideration and incorporation of the review, comments, and recommendations of the joint committee, the legislative auditor shall transmit the final performance audit report to the affected agency or local government, the director of financial management, the leadership of the senate and the house of representatives, and the appropriate standing committees of the house of representatives and the senate and shall publish the results and make the report available to the public. For purposes of this section, "leadership of the senate and the house of representatives" means the speaker of the house, the majority leaders of the senate and the house of representatives, the minority leaders of the senate and the house of representatives, the caucus chairs of both major political parties of the senate and the house of representatives, and the floor leaders of both major political parties of the senate and the house of representatives.

\[ [2010 c 26 § 4](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/2009-10/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/House/2406.SL.pdf?cite=2010%20c%2026%20§%204); [2005 c 319 § 113](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/2005-06/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/Senate/5513.SL.pdf?cite=2005%20c%20319%20§%20113); [2003 c 362 § 14](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/2003-04/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/Senate/5748-S.SL.pdf?cite=2003%20c%20362%20§%2014); [1996 c 288 § 13](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/1995-96/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/House/2222-S2.SL.pdf?cite=1996%20c%20288%20§%2013); \]

## 44.28.091 - Compliance reports—Preliminary and final.
1. No later than nine months after the final performance audit has been transmitted by the joint committee to the appropriate standing committees of the house of representatives and the senate, the joint committee in consultation with the standing committees may produce a preliminary compliance report on the agency's or local government's compliance with the final performance audit recommendations. The agency or local government may attach its comments to the joint committee's preliminary compliance report as a separate addendum.

2. Within three months after the issuance of the preliminary compliance report, the joint committee may hold at least one public hearing and receive public testimony regarding the findings and recommendations contained in the preliminary compliance report. The joint committee may waive the public hearing requirement if the preliminary compliance report demonstrates that the agency or local government is in compliance with the audit recommendations. The joint committee shall issue any final compliance report within four weeks after the public hearing or hearings. The legislative auditor shall transmit the final compliance report in the same manner as a final performance audit is transmitted under RCW 44.28.088.

\[ [1996 c 288 § 14](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/1995-96/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/House/2222-S2.SL.pdf?cite=1996%20c%20288%20§%2014); \]

## 44.28.094 - Quality control review of joint committee.
Subject to the joint committee's approval, the office of the joint committee shall undergo an external quality control review within three years of June 6, 1996, and at regular intervals thereafter. The review must be conducted by an independent organization that has experience in conducting performance audits. The quality control review must include, at a minimum, an evaluation of the quality of the audits conducted by the joint committee, an assessment of the audit procedures used by the joint committee, and an assessment of the qualifications of the joint committee staff to conduct performance audits.

\[ [1996 c 288 § 15](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/1995-96/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/House/2222-S2.SL.pdf?cite=1996%20c%20288%20§%2015); \]

## 44.28.097 - Agency and local government reports furnished to joint committee.
All agency and local government reports concerning program performance, including administrative review, quality control, and other internal audit or performance reports, as requested by the joint committee, shall be furnished by the agency or local government requested to provide such report.

\[ [2010 c 26 § 5](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/2009-10/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/House/2406.SL.pdf?cite=2010%20c%2026%20§%205); [1996 c 288 § 18](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/1995-96/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/House/2222-S2.SL.pdf?cite=1996%20c%20288%20§%2018); [1973 1st ex.s. c 197 § 2](http://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1973ex1c197.pdf?cite=1973%201st%20ex.s.%20c%20197%20§%202); \]

## 44.28.100 - Reports, minutes.
The joint committee may make reports from time to time to the members of the legislature and to the public with respect to any of its findings or recommendations. The joint committee shall keep complete minutes of its meetings.

\[ [1996 c 288 § 19](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/1995-96/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/House/2222-S2.SL.pdf?cite=1996%20c%20288%20§%2019); [1987 c 505 § 45](http://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1987c505.pdf?cite=1987%20c%20505%20§%2045); [1975 1st ex.s. c 293 § 16](http://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1975ex1c293.pdf?cite=1975%201st%20ex.s.%20c%20293%20§%2016); [1951 c 43 § 6](http://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1951c43.pdf?cite=1951%20c%2043%20§%206); \]

## 44.28.110 - Examinations—Subpoenas—Depositions—Access to confidential records.
1. In the discharge of any duty herein imposed, the joint committee or any personnel under its authority and its subcommittees shall have the authority to examine and inspect all properties, equipment, facilities, files, records, and accounts of any state office, department, institution, board, committee, commission, agency, or local government, and to administer oaths, issue subpoenas, compel the attendance of witnesses and the production of any papers, books, accounts, documents, and testimony, and to cause the deposition of witnesses, either residing within or without the state, to be taken in the manner prescribed by laws for taking depositions in civil actions in the superior courts.

2. The authority in this section extends to accessing any confidential records needed to discharge the joint committee's performance audit duties. However, access to confidential records for the purpose of conducting performance audits does not change their confidential nature, and any existing confidentiality requirements shall remain in force and be similarly respected by the joint committee and its staff.

\[ [2010 c 26 § 6](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/2009-10/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/House/2406.SL.pdf?cite=2010%20c%2026%20§%206); [1955 c 206 § 8](http://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1955c206.pdf?cite=1955%20c%20206%20§%208); [1951 c 43 § 8](http://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1951c43.pdf?cite=1951%20c%2043%20§%208); \]

## 44.28.120 - Contempt proceedings—Recalcitrant witnesses.
In case of the failure on the part of any person to comply with any subpoena issued in behalf of the joint committee, or on the refusal of any witness to testify to any matters regarding which he or she may be lawfully interrogated, it shall be the duty of the superior court of any county, or of the judge thereof, on application of the joint committee, to compel obedience by proceedings for contempt, as in the case of disobedience of the requirements of a subpoena issued from such court or a refusal to testify therein.

\[ [1996 c 288 § 20](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/1995-96/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/House/2222-S2.SL.pdf?cite=1996%20c%20288%20§%2020); [1951 c 43 § 9](http://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1951c43.pdf?cite=1951%20c%2043%20§%209); \]

## 44.28.130 - Witness fees and mileage.
Each witness who appears before the joint committee by its order, other than a state official or employee, shall receive for his or her attendance the fees and mileage provided for witnesses in civil cases in courts of record, which shall be audited and paid upon the presentation of proper vouchers signed by such witness, verified by the legislative auditor, and approved by the chair and the vice chair of the joint committee.

\[ [1996 c 288 § 21](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/1995-96/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/House/2222-S2.SL.pdf?cite=1996%20c%20288%20§%2021); [1951 c 43 § 10](http://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1951c43.pdf?cite=1951%20c%2043%20§%2010); \]

## 44.28.150 - Cooperation with legislative committees and others.
The joint committee shall cooperate, act, and function with legislative committees and with the councils or committees of other states similar to this joint committee and with other interstate research organizations.

\[ [1996 c 288 § 22](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/1995-96/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/House/2222-S2.SL.pdf?cite=1996%20c%20288%20§%2022); [1975 1st ex.s. c 293 § 18](http://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1975ex1c293.pdf?cite=1975%201st%20ex.s.%20c%20293%20§%2018); [1951 c 43 § 7](http://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1951c43.pdf?cite=1951%20c%2043%20§%207); \]

## 44.28.155 - WorkFirst program evaluation.
1. The joint legislative audit and review committee shall conduct an evaluation of the effectiveness of the WorkFirst program described in chapter 58, Laws of 1997, including the job opportunities and basic skills training program and any approved private, county, or local government WorkFirst program. The evaluation shall assess the success of the program in assisting clients to become employed and to reduce their use of temporary assistance for needy families. The study shall include but not be limited to the following:

    a. An assessment of employment outcomes, including hourly wages, hours worked, and total earnings, for clients;

    b. A comparison of temporary assistance for needy families outcomes, including grant amounts and program exits, for clients; and

    c. An audit of the performance-based contract for each private nonprofit contractor for job opportunities and basic skills training program services. The joint legislative audit and review committee may contract with the Washington institute for public policy for appropriate portions of the evaluation required by this section.

2. Administrative data shall be provided by the department of social and health services, the employment security department, the state board for community and technical colleges, local governments, and private contractors. The department of social and health services shall require contractors to provide administrative and outcome data needed for this study as a condition of contract compliance.

\[ [1997 c 58 § 705](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/1997-98/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/House/3901.SL.pdf?cite=1997%20c%2058%20§%20705); \]

## 44.28.156 - Education performance agreement pilot—Evaluation.
The joint committee shall conduct an evaluation of the higher education performance agreement pilot test under *RCW 28B.10.920 through 28B.10.922 and make recommendations regarding changes to the substance or process of creating the agreements, including whether the performance agreement process should be continued and expanded to include additional higher education institutions. The evaluation shall be submitted to the governor and the higher education committees of the senate and house of representatives by November 1, 2014.

\[ [2008 c 160 § 5](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/2007-08/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/House/2641.SL.pdf?cite=2008%20c%20160%20§%205); \]

## 44.28.157 - School district health benefits—Review—Recommendations—Performance grants—Report.
1. By December 31, 2015, the joint committee must review the reports on school district health benefits submitted to it by the office of the insurance commissioner and the health care authority and report to the legislature on the progress by school districts and their benefit providers in meeting the following legislative goals to:

    a. Improve the transparency of health benefit plan claims and financial data to assure prudent and efficient use of taxpayers' funds at the state and local levels;

    b. Create greater affordability for full family coverage and greater equity between premium costs for full family coverage and employee only coverage for the same health benefit plan;

    c. Promote health care innovations and cost savings and significantly reduce administrative costs.

2. The joint committee shall also make a recommendation regarding a specific target to realize the goal in subsection (1)(b) of this section.

3. The joint committee shall report on the status of individual school districts' progress in achieving the goals in subsection (1) of this section.

4. [Empty]
    a. In the 2015-2016 school year, the joint committee shall determine which school districts have met the requirements of *RCW 28A.400.350 (5) and (6), and shall rank order these districts from highest to lowest in term of their performance in meeting the requirements.

    b. The joint committee shall then allocate performance grants to the highest performing districts from a performance fund of five million dollars appropriated by the legislature for this purpose. Performance grants shall be used by school districts only to reduce employee health insurance copayments and deductibles. In determining the number of school districts to receive awards, the joint committee must consider the impact of the award on district employee copayments and deductibles in such a manner that the award amounts have a meaningful impact.

5. If the joint committee determines that districts and their benefit providers have not made adequate progress, in the judgment of the joint committee, in achieving one or more of the legislative goals in subsection (1) of this section, the joint committee report to the legislature must contain advantages, disadvantages, and recommendations on the following:

    a. Why adequate progress has not been made, to the extent the joint committee is able to determine the reason or reasons for the insufficient progress;

    b. What legislative or agency actions would help remove barriers to improvement;

    c. Whether school district health insurance purchasing should be accomplished through a single consolidated school employee health benefits purchasing plan;

    d. Whether school district health insurance purchasing should be accomplished through the public employees' benefits board program, and whether consolidation into the public employees' benefits board program would be preferable to the creation of a consolidated school employee health benefits purchasing plan; and

    e. Whether certificated or classified employees, as separate groups, would be better served by purchasing health insurance through a single consolidated school employee health benefits purchasing plan or through participation in the public employees' benefits board program.

6. The report shall contain any legislation necessary to implement the recommendations of the joint committee.

7. The legislature shall take all steps necessary to implement the recommendations of the joint committee unless the legislature adopts alternative strategies to meet its goals during the 2016 session.

\[ [2012 2nd sp.s. c 3 § 7](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/2011-12/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/Senate/5940-S.SL.pdf?cite=2012%202nd%20sp.s.%20c%203%20§%207); \]

## 44.28.190 - Review of increased density bonus for affordable housing located on property owned by a religious organization.
The joint committee must review the efficacy of the increased density bonus incentive for affordable housing development located on property owned by a religious organization pursuant to chapter 218, Laws of 2019 and report its findings to the appropriate committees of the legislature by December 1, 2030. The review must include a recommendation on whether this incentive should be continued without change or should be amended or repealed.

\[ [2019 c 218 § 4](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/2019-20/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/House/1377-S.SL.pdf?cite=2019%20c%20218%20§%204); \]

## 44.28.805 - Review of distributions to cities and counties—Report.
During calendar year 2008, the joint legislative audit and review committee shall review the distributions to cities and counties under RCW 43.08.290 to determine the extent to which the distributions target the needs of cities and counties for which the repeal of the motor vehicle excise tax had the greatest fiscal impact. In conducting the study, the committee shall solicit input from the cities and counties. The department of revenue and the state treasurer shall provide the committee with any data within their purview that the committee considers necessary to conduct the review. The committee shall report to the legislature the results of its findings, and any recommendations for changes to the distribution formulas under RCW 43.08.290, by December 31, 2008.

\[ [2005 c 450 § 3](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/2005-06/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/Senate/6050-S.SL.pdf?cite=2005%20c%20450%20§%203); \]

## 44.28.810 - Review of governor's interagency coordinating council on health disparities—Report to the legislature.
The joint committee shall conduct a review of the governor's interagency coordinating council on health disparities and its functions. The review shall be substantially the same as a sunset review under chapter 43.131 RCW. The joint committee shall present its findings to appropriate committees of the legislature by December 1, 2016.

\[ [2006 c 239 § 7](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/2005-06/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/Senate/6197-S2.SL.pdf?cite=2006%20c%20239%20§%207); \]

## 44.28.812 - Review of impact fee deferral requirements. (Expires January 1, 2022.)
1. The joint legislative audit and review committee must review the impact fee deferral requirements of RCW 82.02.050(3). The review must consist of an examination of issued impact fee deferrals, including: (a) The number of deferrals requested of and issued by counties, cities, and towns; (b) the type of impact fee deferred; (c) the monetary amount of deferrals, by jurisdiction; (d) whether the deferral process was efficiently administered; (e) the number of deferrals that were not fully and timely paid; and (f) the costs to counties, cities, and towns for collecting timely and delinquent fees. The review must also include an evaluation of whether the impact fee deferral process required by RCW 82.02.050(3) was effective in providing a locally administered process for the deferral and full payment of impact fees.

2. The review required by this section must, in accordance with RCW 43.01.036, be submitted to the appropriate committees of the house of representatives and the senate on or before September 1, 2021.

3. In complying with this section, and in accordance with RCW 43.31.980, the joint legislative audit and review committee must make its collected data and associated materials available, upon request, to the department of commerce.

4. This section expires January 1, 2022.

\[ [2015 c 241 § 3](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/2015-16/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/Senate/5923.SL.pdf?cite=2015%20c%20241%20§%203); \]

## 44.28.818 - Review of office of privacy and data protection. (Expires July 1, 2026.)
1. The joint committee must conduct a program and fiscal review of the office of privacy and data protection created in RCW 43.105.369, by June 30, 2025, and report its findings to the legislature and the governor by December 1, 2025. The report must be prepared in the manner set forth in RCW 44.28.071 and 44.28.075.

2. This section expires July 1, 2026.

\[ [2016 c 195 § 3](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/2015-16/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/House/2875-S.SL.pdf?cite=2016%20c%20195%20§%203); \]

## 44.28.900 - Severability—1951 c 43.
If any section, subsection, paragraph or provision of this chapter shall be held invalid by any court for any reason, such invalidity shall not in any way affect the validity of the remainder of this chapter.

\[ [1951 c 43 § 16](http://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1951c43.pdf?cite=1951%20c%2043%20§%2016); \]


## **44.28.XXX - TBD**
**
The joint committee shall incorporate a racial equity analysis into performance audits, sunset reviews, and other audits or reports conducted by the joint committee. The joint committee shall note in its audits, reviews, and reports if a racial equity analysis is not necessary or appropriate. The joint committee may work with the office of equity, the governor's office of Indian affairs, the LGBTQ commission, the Washington state women's commission, and the ethnic commissions to design the racial equity analysis required under this section.


[ 2021 c XXX § 1; ]**
