# 90.52 - Pollution disclosure act of 1971.
* [90.52.005 - Environmental excellence program agreements—Effect on chapter.](#9052005---environmental-excellence-program-agreementseffect-on-chapter)
* [90.52.010 - Annual reports required—Contents—Critical materials designated.](#9052010---annual-reports-requiredcontentscritical-materials-designated)
* [90.52.020 - Confidentiality as to manufacturing processes.](#9052020---confidentiality-as-to-manufacturing-processes)
* [90.52.030 - Operation subject to injunction, when—Civil penalties.](#9052030---operation-subject-to-injunction-whencivil-penalties)
* [90.52.040 - Wastes to be provided with available methods of treatment prior to discharge into waters of the state.](#9052040---wastes-to-be-provided-with-available-methods-of-treatment-prior-to-discharge-into-waters-of-the-state)
* [90.52.900 - Short title.](#9052900---short-title)
## 90.52.005 - Environmental excellence program agreements—Effect on chapter.
Notwithstanding any other provision of law, any legal requirement under this chapter, including any standard, limitation, rule, or order is superseded and replaced in accordance with the terms and provisions of an environmental excellence program agreement, entered into under chapter 43.21K RCW.

\[ [1997 c 381 § 27](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/1997-98/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/House/1866-S2.SL.pdf?cite=1997%20c%20381%20§%2027); \]

## 90.52.010 - Annual reports required—Contents—Critical materials designated.
Every person conducting a commercial or industrial operation within this state who discharges wastes, other than sanitary sewage, into waters of the state or into any sewer system which discharges into waters of the state, and every person conducting a commercial or industrial operation within the state who discharges wastes into the air of the state, shall file, annually, during the month of January, reports, on forms provided by the department of ecology, setting forth:

1. The nature of the enterprise;

2. A list of materials used in, and incidental to, its manufacturing processes, including by-products and waste products;

3. The estimated annual total gallons or pounds (or other appropriate measurement) of wastes, including, but not limited to, process and cooling water to be discharged into the water or air, or into any sewer system.

The list of materials provided for in subsection (2) hereof shall relate to all materials designated by the director of the department of ecology, after consultation with a committee on [of] environmental specialists of not less than five appointed by the director, as critical materials which have substantial potential to adversely affect the quality of waters or environment of the state, or the uses made thereof, if allowed to enter the same. Formal designation shall be adopted by the director as a rule and filed in a "critical materials" registry of the department of ecology. "Person" as used herein means an individual partnership, firm, corporation, association or other entity.

\[ [1971 ex.s. c 160 § 1](https://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1971ex1c160.pdf?cite=1971%20ex.s.%20c%20160%20§%201); \]

## 90.52.020 - Confidentiality as to manufacturing processes.
The department of ecology shall provide proper and adequate procedures to safeguard the confidentiality of manufacturing processes: PROVIDED, That the confidentiality shall not extend to waste products discharged into the waters or air of the state.

\[ [1971 ex.s. c 160 § 2](https://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1971ex1c160.pdf?cite=1971%20ex.s.%20c%20160%20§%202); \]

## 90.52.030 - Operation subject to injunction, when—Civil penalties.
Operation of an industrial or commercial operation in violation of RCW 90.52.010 may be enjoined on petition of the attorney general to the superior court of Thurston county or of the county in which the operation is located.

Operation of an industrial or commercial operation in violation of this chapter shall provide the basis of a civil penalty under RCW 90.48.144 or 70A.15.3160 as now or are hereafter amended. No person may discharge wastes into the waters or air of the state who fails to satisfy the requirements of RCW 90.52.010 and 90.52.040.

\[ [2020 c 20 § 1504](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/2019-20/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/House/2246-S.SL.pdf?cite=2020%20c%2020%20§%201504); [1971 ex.s. c 160 § 3](https://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1971ex1c160.pdf?cite=1971%20ex.s.%20c%20160%20§%203); \]

## 90.52.040 - Wastes to be provided with available methods of treatment prior to discharge into waters of the state.
Except as provided in RCW 90.54.020(3)(b), in the administration of the provisions of chapter 90.48 RCW, the director of the department of ecology shall, regardless of the quality of the water of the state to which wastes are discharged or proposed for discharge, and regardless of the minimum water quality standards established by the director for said waters, require wastes to be provided with all known, available, and reasonable methods of treatment prior to their discharge or entry into waters of the state.

\[ [1987 c 399 § 1](https://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1987c399.pdf?cite=1987%20c%20399%20§%201); [1971 ex.s. c 160 § 4](https://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1971ex1c160.pdf?cite=1971%20ex.s.%20c%20160%20§%204); \]

## 90.52.900 - Short title.
This act shall be known and may be cited as the Pollution Disclosure Act of 1971.

\[ [1971 ex.s. c 160 § 5](https://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1971ex1c160.pdf?cite=1971%20ex.s.%20c%20160%20§%205); \]

