# Engrossed Substitute Senate Bill 5478 as Recommended by Ways & Means - as passed by the Legislature

[Source](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/2021-22/Xml/Bills/Senate%20Passed%20Legislature/5478-S.PL.xml)
## Section 1
(1) The legislature finds that certain businesses in Washington have experienced significant and unanticipated impacts during the COVID-19 pandemic. The legislature intends to preemptively minimize the disproportionate impact COVID-19 economic closures have had on these businesses.
(2) Small businesses in particular have fewer reserves and fewer resources to rely upon in periods of downturn. Those businesses owned by historically disadvantaged groups, such as women, minority populations, and immigrants, often experience disproportionately more distress and burden due to the economic impacts of the COVID-19 pandemic compared to their counterparts across the remaining business community. These businesses are absolutely critical to the success of Washington's continued high ratings, number one gross domestic product, and are part of the backbone of Washington's diverse and resilient economy.
(3) The legislature finds that ESSB 5061, passed by the legislature and signed by the governor earlier in the 2021 session, mitigated immediate impacts to employers through caps on the social tax, suspension of the solvency surcharge, and relief of certain benefit charges.
(4) The legislature now intends to address the disproportionate impacts on small and other significantly impacted businesses beyond the limited time period addressed in ESSB 5061. The legislature intends to provide this targeted relief through the one-time application of funds, in order to provide critical support for many of the businesses that are essential to Washington's recovery and ongoing economic vitality, while maintaining a healthy unemployment insurance trust fund for Washington's workers.

## Section 11
If any part of this act is found to be in conflict with federal requirements that are a prescribed condition to the allocation of federal funds to the state or the eligibility of employers in this state for federal unemployment tax credits, the conflicting part of this act is inoperative solely to the extent of the conflict, and the finding or determination does not affect the operation of the remainder of this act. Rules adopted under this act must meet federal requirements that are a necessary condition to the receipt of federal funds by the state or the granting of federal unemployment tax credits to employers in this state.
