# 5.46 - Uniform photographic copies of business and public records as evidence act.
* [5.46.010 - Copies of business and public records as evidence.](#546010---copies-of-business-and-public-records-as-evidence)
* [5.46.900 - Construction—1953 c 273.](#546900---construction1953-c-273)
* [5.46.910 - Short title.](#546910---short-title)
* [5.46.920 - Repeal of inconsistent provisions.](#546920---repeal-of-inconsistent-provisions)
## 5.46.010 - Copies of business and public records as evidence.
If any business, institution, member of a profession or calling or any department or agency of government, in the regular course of business or activity has kept or recorded any memorandum, writing, entry, print, representation or combination thereof, of any act, transaction, occurrence or event, and in the regular course of business has caused any or all of the same to be recorded, copied or reproduced by any photographic, photostatic, microfilm, microcard, miniature photographic, optical imaging, or other process which accurately reproduces or forms a durable medium for so reproducing the original, the original may be destroyed in the regular course of business unless the same is an asset or is representative of title to an asset held in a custodial or fiduciary capacity or unless its preservation is required by law. Such reproduction, when satisfactorily identified, is as admissible in evidence as the original itself in any judicial or administrative proceeding whether the original is in existence or not and an enlargement or facsimile of such reproduction is likewise admissible in evidence if the original reproduction is in existence and available for inspection under direction of court. The introduction of a reproduced record, enlargement or facsimile, does not preclude admission of the original.

\[ [1994 c 19 § 1](https://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/1993-94/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/House/2377.SL.pdf?cite=1994%20c%2019%20§%201); [1959 c 125 § 1](https://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1959c125.pdf?cite=1959%20c%20125%20§%201); [1953 c 273 § 1](https://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1953c273.pdf?cite=1953%20c%20273%20§%201); \]

## 5.46.900 - Construction—1953 c 273.
This chapter shall be so interpreted and construed as to effectuate its general purpose of making uniform the law of those states which enact it.

\[ [1953 c 273 § 2](https://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1953c273.pdf?cite=1953%20c%20273%20§%202); \]

## 5.46.910 - Short title.
This chapter may be cited as the "Uniform Photographic Copies of Business and Public Records as Evidence Act."

\[ [1953 c 273 § 3](https://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1953c273.pdf?cite=1953%20c%20273%20§%203); \]

## 5.46.920 - Repeal of inconsistent provisions.
All acts or parts of acts which are inconsistent with the provisions of this act are repealed.

\[ [1953 c 273 § 4](https://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1953c273.pdf?cite=1953%20c%20273%20§%204); \]

