# 73.40 - Veterans' memorials.
* [73.40.010 - Memorial honoring state residents who died or are missing-in-action in southeast Asia.](#7340010---memorial-honoring-state-residents-who-died-or-are-missing-in-action-in-southeast-asia)
* [73.40.030 - Memorial honoring state residents who died or are missing-in-action in southeast Asia—Display of individual names.](#7340030---memorial-honoring-state-residents-who-died-or-are-missing-in-action-in-southeast-asiadisplay-of-individual-names)
* [73.40.040 - Memorial honoring state residents who died or are missing-in-action in the Korean conflict.](#7340040---memorial-honoring-state-residents-who-died-or-are-missing-in-action-in-the-korean-conflict)
## 73.40.010 - Memorial honoring state residents who died or are missing-in-action in southeast Asia.
The secretary of state shall coordinate the design, construction, and placement of a memorial within the state capitol building honoring Washington state residents who died or are "missing-in-action" in the southeast Asia theater of operations.

\[ [1984 c 81 § 1](https://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1984c81.pdf?cite=1984%20c%2081%20§%201); \]

## 73.40.030 - Memorial honoring state residents who died or are missing-in-action in southeast Asia—Display of individual names.
The memorial authorized by *RCW 40.14.200 through 40.14.210 shall display the individual names of the Washington state residents who died or are "missing-in-action" in the southeast Asia theater of operations.

\[ [1984 c 81 § 3](https://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1984c81.pdf?cite=1984%20c%2081%20§%203); \]

## 73.40.040 - Memorial honoring state residents who died or are missing-in-action in the Korean conflict.
The director of the department of veterans affairs shall coordinate the design, construction, and placement of a memorial within the state capitol grounds honoring Washington state residents who died or are "missing-in-action" in the Korean conflict.

\[ [1989 c 235 § 1](https://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1989c235.pdf?cite=1989%20c%20235%20§%201); \]

