# 18.235 - Uniform regulation of business and professions act.
* [18.235.005 - Intent.](#18235005---intent)
* [18.235.010 - Definitions.](#18235010---definitions)
* [18.235.020 - Application of chapter—Director's authority—Disciplinary authority.](#18235020---application-of-chapterdirectors-authoritydisciplinary-authority)
* [18.235.030 - Disciplinary authority—Powers.](#18235030---disciplinary-authoritypowers)
* [18.235.040 - Director's authority.](#18235040---directors-authority)
* [18.235.050 - Statement of charges—Hearing.](#18235050---statement-of-chargeshearing)
* [18.235.060 - Procedures governing adjudicative proceedings.](#18235060---procedures-governing-adjudicative-proceedings)
* [18.235.070 - Previous denial, revocation, or suspension of license.](#18235070---previous-denial-revocation-or-suspension-of-license)
* [18.235.080 - Orders.](#18235080---orders)
* [18.235.090 - Appeal.](#18235090---appeal)
* [18.235.100 - Reinstatement.](#18235100---reinstatement)
* [18.235.110 - Unprofessional conduct—Finding.](#18235110---unprofessional-conductfinding)
* [18.235.120 - Payment of a fine.](#18235120---payment-of-a-fine)
* [18.235.130 - Unprofessional conduct—Acts or conditions that constitute.](#18235130---unprofessional-conductacts-or-conditions-that-constitute)
* [18.235.140 - Final order issued under RCW  18.235.130—Failure to comply.](#18235140---final-order-issued-under-rcw--18235130failure-to-comply)
* [18.235.150 - Investigation of complaint—Cease and desist order/notice of intent to issue—Final determination—Fine—Temporary cease and desist order—Action/who may maintain—Remedies not limited.](#18235150---investigation-of-complaintcease-and-desist-ordernotice-of-intent-to-issuefinal-determinationfinetemporary-cease-and-desist-orderactionwho-may-maintainremedies-not-limited)
* [18.235.160 - Violation of injunction—Contempt of court—Civil penalty.](#18235160---violation-of-injunctioncontempt-of-courtcivil-penalty)
* [18.235.170 - Misrepresentation—Gross misdemeanor.](#18235170---misrepresentationgross-misdemeanor)
* [18.235.180 - Crime or violation by license holder—Disciplinary authority may give notification.](#18235180---crime-or-violation-by-license-holderdisciplinary-authority-may-give-notification)
* [18.235.190 - Immunity from suit.](#18235190---immunity-from-suit)
* [18.235.200 - Use of records—Exchange of information—Chapter does not affect or limit.](#18235200---use-of-recordsexchange-of-informationchapter-does-not-affect-or-limit)
* [18.235.210 - Application of chapter—January 1, 2003.](#18235210---application-of-chapterjanuary-1-2003)
* [18.235.215 - Application of chapter to notarial officers.](#18235215---application-of-chapter-to-notarial-officers)
* [18.235.900 - Short title.](#18235900---short-title)
* [18.235.901 - Effective date—2002 c 86 §§ 101-123.](#18235901---effective-date2002-c-86--101-123)
* [18.235.902 - Part headings not law—2002 c 86.](#18235902---part-headings-not-law2002-c-86)
* [18.235.903 - Severability—2002 c 86.](#18235903---severability2002-c-86)
## 18.235.005 - Intent.
It is the intent of the legislature to consolidate disciplinary procedures for the licensed businesses and professions under the department of licensing by providing a uniform disciplinary act with standardized procedures for the regulation of businesses and professions and the enforcement of laws, the purpose of which is to assure the public of the adequacy of business and professional competence and conduct.

It is also the intent of the legislature that all businesses and professions newly credentialed by the state and regulated by the department of licensing come under this chapter.

\[ [2007 c 256 § 10](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/2007-08/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/House/1574-S.SL.pdf?cite=2007%20c%20256%20§%2010); [2002 c 86 § 101](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/2001-02/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/House/2512-S.SL.pdf?cite=2002%20c%2086%20§%20101); \]

## 18.235.010 - Definitions.
The definitions in this section apply throughout this chapter unless the context clearly requires otherwise.

1. "Board" means those boards specified in RCW 18.235.020(2)(b).

2. "Department" means the department of licensing.

3. [Empty]

   a. "Director" means the:

      i. Executive director of the state board of registration for professional engineers and land surveyors for matters under the authority of the state board of registration for professional engineers and land surveyors established under chapter 18.43 RCW; or

      ii. Director of the department or the director's designee in all other contexts.

   b. The director of the department has no authority under this chapter over the state board of registration for professional engineers and land surveyors.

4. "Disciplinary action" means sanctions identified in RCW 18.235.110.

5. "Disciplinary authority" means the director, board, or commission having the authority to take disciplinary action against a holder of, or applicant for, a professional or business license upon a finding of a violation of this chapter or a chapter specified under RCW 18.235.020.

6. "License," "licensing," and "licensure" are deemed equivalent to the terms "license," "licensing," "licensure," "certificate," "certification," and "registration" as those terms are defined in RCW 18.118.020. Each of these terms, and the term "commission" under chapter 42.45 RCW, are interchangeable under the provisions of this chapter.

7. "Unlicensed practice" means:

   a. Practicing a profession or operating a business identified in RCW 18.235.020 without holding a valid, unexpired, unrevoked, and unsuspended license to do so; or

   b. Representing to a person, through offerings, advertisements, or use of a professional title or designation, that the individual or business is qualified to practice a profession or operate a business identified in RCW 18.235.020 without holding a valid, unexpired, unrevoked, and unsuspended license to do so.

\[ [2019 c 442 § 21](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/2019-20/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/House/1176.SL.pdf?cite=2019%20c%20442%20§%2021); [2017 c 281 § 36](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/2017-18/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/Senate/5081-S.SL.pdf?cite=2017%20c%20281%20§%2036); [2007 c 256 § 11](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/2007-08/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/House/1574-S.SL.pdf?cite=2007%20c%20256%20§%2011); [2002 c 86 § 102](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/2001-02/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/House/2512-S.SL.pdf?cite=2002%20c%2086%20§%20102); \]

## 18.235.020 - Application of chapter—Director's authority—Disciplinary authority.
1. This chapter applies only to the director and the boards and commissions having jurisdiction in relation to the businesses and professions licensed under the chapters specified in this section. This chapter does not apply to any business or profession not licensed under the chapters specified in this section.

2. [Empty]

   a. The director has authority under this chapter in relation to the following businesses and professions:

      i. Auctioneers under chapter 18.11 RCW;

      ii. Bail bond agents and bail bond recovery agents under chapter 18.185 RCW;

      iii. Camping resorts' operators and salespersons under chapter 19.105 RCW;

      iv. Commercial telephone solicitors under chapter 19.158 RCW;

      v. Cosmetologists, barbers, manicurists, and estheticians under chapter 18.16 RCW;

      vi. Court reporters under chapter 18.145 RCW;

      vii. Driver training schools and instructors under chapter 46.82 RCW;

      viii. Employment agencies under chapter 19.31 RCW;

      ix. For hire vehicle operators under chapter 46.72 RCW;

      x. Limousines under chapter 46.72A RCW;

      xi. Notaries public under chapter 42.45 RCW;

      xii. Private investigators under chapter 18.165 RCW;

      xiii. Professional boxing, martial arts, and wrestling under chapter 67.08 RCW;

      xiv. Real estate appraisers under chapter 18.140 RCW;

      xv. Real estate brokers and salespersons under chapters 18.85 and 18.86 RCW;

      xvi. Scrap metal processors, scrap metal recyclers, and scrap metal suppliers under chapter 19.290 RCW;

      xvii. Security guards under chapter 18.170 RCW;

      xviii. Sellers of travel under chapter 19.138 RCW;

      xix. Timeshares and timeshare salespersons under chapter 64.36 RCW;

      xx. Whitewater river outfitters under chapter 79A.60 RCW;

      xxi. Home inspectors under chapter 18.280 RCW;

      xxii. Body artists, body piercers, and tattoo artists, and body art, body piercing, and tattooing shops and businesses, under chapter 18.300 RCW; and

      xxiii. Appraisal management companies under chapter 18.310 RCW.

   b. The boards and commissions having authority under this chapter are as follows:

      i. The state board for architects established in chapter 18.08 RCW;

      ii. The Washington state collection agency board established in chapter 19.16 RCW;

      iii. The state board of registration for professional engineers and land surveyors established in chapter 18.43 RCW governing licenses issued under chapters 18.43 and 18.210 RCW;

      iv. The funeral and cemetery board established in chapter 18.39 RCW governing licenses issued under chapters 18.39 and 68.05 RCW;

      v. The state board of licensure for landscape architects established in chapter 18.96 RCW; and

      vi. The state geologist licensing board established in chapter 18.220 RCW.

3. In addition to the authority to discipline license holders, the disciplinary authority may grant or deny licenses based on the conditions and criteria established in this chapter and the chapters specified in subsection (2) of this section. This chapter also governs any investigation, hearing, or proceeding relating to denial of licensure or issuance of a license conditioned on the applicant's compliance with an order entered under RCW 18.235.110 by the disciplinary authority.

\[ [2017 c 281 § 37](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/2017-18/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/Senate/5081-S.SL.pdf?cite=2017%20c%20281%20§%2037); [2013 c 322 § 29](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/2013-14/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/House/1552-S.SL.pdf?cite=2013%20c%20322%20§%2029); [2010 c 179 § 18](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/2009-10/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/House/3040-S.SL.pdf?cite=2010%20c%20179%20§%2018); [2009 c 412 § 22](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/2009-10/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/Senate/5391-S.SL.pdf?cite=2009%20c%20412%20§%2022); [2009 c 370 § 20](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/2009-10/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/Senate/5273-S.SL.pdf?cite=2009%20c%20370%20§%2020); [2009 c 102 § 5](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/2009-10/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/House/2126-S.SL.pdf?cite=2009%20c%20102%20§%205); [2008 c 119 § 21](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/2007-08/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/Senate/6606-S.SL.pdf?cite=2008%20c%20119%20§%2021); [2007 c 256 § 12](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/2007-08/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/House/1574-S.SL.pdf?cite=2007%20c%20256%20§%2012); [2006 c 219 § 13](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/2005-06/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/House/2829.SL.pdf?cite=2006%20c%20219%20§%2013); [2002 c 86 § 103](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/2001-02/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/House/2512-S.SL.pdf?cite=2002%20c%2086%20§%20103); \]

## 18.235.030 - Disciplinary authority—Powers.
The disciplinary authority has the power to:

1. Adopt, amend, and rescind rules as necessary to carry out the purposes of this chapter, including, but not limited to, rules regarding standards of professional conduct and practice;

2. Investigate complaints or reports of unprofessional conduct and hold hearings as provided in this chapter;

3. Issue subpoenas and administer oaths in connection with any investigation, hearing, or proceeding held under this chapter;

4. Take or cause depositions to be taken and use other discovery procedures as needed in an investigation, hearing, or proceeding held under this chapter;

5. Compel attendance of witnesses at hearings;

6. Conduct practice reviews in the course of investigating a complaint or report of unprofessional conduct, unless the disciplinary authority is authorized to audit or inspect applicants or licensees under the chapters specified in RCW 18.235.020;

7. Take emergency action ordering summary suspension of a license, or restriction or limitation of the licensee's practice or business pending proceedings by the disciplinary authority;

8. Appoint a presiding officer or authorize the office of administrative hearings, as provided in chapter 34.12 RCW, to conduct hearings. The disciplinary authority may make the final decision regarding disposition of the license unless the disciplinary authority elects to delegate, in writing, the final decision to the presiding officer;

9. Use individual members of the boards and commissions to direct investigations. However, the member of the board or commission may not subsequently participate in the hearing of the case;

10. Enter into contracts for professional services determined to be necessary for adequate enforcement of this chapter;

11. Grant or deny license applications, secure the return of a license obtained through the mistake or inadvertence of the department or the disciplinary authority after providing the person so licensed with an opportunity for an adjudicative proceeding, and, in the event of a finding of unprofessional conduct by an applicant or license holder, impose any sanction against a license applicant or license holder provided by this chapter;

12. Designate individuals authorized to sign subpoenas and statements of charges;

13. Establish panels consisting of three or more members of the board or commission to perform any duty or authority within the board's or commission's jurisdiction under this chapter; and

14. Contract with licensees, registrants, endorsement or permit holders, or any other persons or organizations to provide services necessary for the monitoring or supervision of licensees, registrants, or endorsement or permit holders who are placed on probation, whose professional or business activities are restricted, or who are for an authorized purpose subject to monitoring by the disciplinary authority. If the subject licensee, registrant, or endorsement or permit holders may only practice or operate a business under the supervision of another licensee, registrant, or endorsement or permit holder under the terms of the law regulating that occupation or business, the supervising licensee, registrant, or endorsement or permit holder must consent to the monitoring or supervision under this subsection, unless the supervising licensee, registrant, or endorsement or permit holder is, at the time, the subject of a disciplinary order.

\[ [2002 c 86 § 104](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/2001-02/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/House/2512-S.SL.pdf?cite=2002%20c%2086%20§%20104); \]

## 18.235.040 - Director's authority.
The director has the following additional authority:

1. To employ investigative, administrative, and clerical staff as necessary for the enforcement of this chapter, except as provided otherwise by statute;

2. Upon request of a board or commission, to appoint not more than three pro tem members as provided in this subsection. Individuals appointed as pro tem members of a board or commission must meet the same minimum qualifications as regular members of the board or commission. While serving as a pro tem board or commission member, a person so appointed has all the powers, duties, and immunities, and is entitled to the entitlements, including travel expenses in accordance with RCW 43.03.050 and 43.03.060, of a regular member of the board or commission; and

3. To establish fees to be paid for witnesses, expert witnesses, and consultants used in any investigation or adjudicative proceedings as authorized by RCW 34.05.446.

\[ [2007 c 256 § 13](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/2007-08/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/House/1574-S.SL.pdf?cite=2007%20c%20256%20§%2013); [2002 c 86 § 105](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/2001-02/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/House/2512-S.SL.pdf?cite=2002%20c%2086%20§%20105); \]

## 18.235.050 - Statement of charges—Hearing.
1. If the disciplinary authority determines, upon investigation, that there is reason to believe that a license holder or applicant for a license has violated RCW 18.235.130 or has not met a minimum eligibility criteria for licensure, the disciplinary authority may prepare and serve the license holder or applicant a statement of charge, charges, or intent to deny. A notice that the license holder or applicant may request a hearing to contest the charge, charges, or intent to deny must accompany the statement. The license holder or applicant must file a request for a hearing with the disciplinary authority within twenty days after being served the statement of charges or statement of intent to deny. The failure to request a hearing constitutes a default, whereupon the disciplinary authority may enter a decision on the facts available to it.

2. If a license holder or applicant for a license requests a hearing, the disciplinary authority must fix the time of the hearing as soon as convenient, but not earlier than thirty days after the service of charge, charges, or intent to deny. The disciplinary authority may hold a hearing sooner than thirty days only if the disciplinary authority has issued a summary suspension or summary restriction.

\[ [2007 c 256 § 14](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/2007-08/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/House/1574-S.SL.pdf?cite=2007%20c%20256%20§%2014); [2002 c 86 § 106](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/2001-02/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/House/2512-S.SL.pdf?cite=2002%20c%2086%20§%20106); \]

## 18.235.060 - Procedures governing adjudicative proceedings.
The procedures governing adjudicative proceedings before agencies under chapter 34.05 RCW, the administrative procedure act, govern all hearings before the disciplinary authority. The disciplinary authority has, in addition to the powers and duties set forth in this chapter, all of the powers and duties under chapter 34.05 RCW, which include, without limitation, all powers relating to the administration of oaths, the receipt of evidence, the issuance and enforcing of subpoenas, and the taking of depositions.

\[ [2002 c 86 § 107](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/2001-02/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/House/2512-S.SL.pdf?cite=2002%20c%2086%20§%20107); \]

## 18.235.070 - Previous denial, revocation, or suspension of license.
The department shall not issue a license to any person whose license has been previously denied, revoked, or suspended by the disciplinary authority for that profession or business, except in conformity with the terms and conditions of the certificate or order of denial, revocation, or suspension, or in conformity with any order of reinstatement issued by the disciplinary authority, or in accordance with the final judgment in any proceeding for review instituted under this chapter.

\[ [2002 c 86 § 108](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/2001-02/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/House/2512-S.SL.pdf?cite=2002%20c%2086%20§%20108); \]

## 18.235.080 - Orders.
An order pursuant to proceedings authorized by this chapter, after due notice and findings in accordance with this chapter and chapter 34.05 RCW, or an order of summary suspension entered under this chapter, takes effect immediately upon its being served. The final order, if appealed to the court, may not be stayed pending the appeal unless the disciplinary authority or court to which the appeal is taken enters an order staying the order of the disciplinary authority, which stay shall provide for terms necessary to protect the public.

\[ [2007 c 256 § 15](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/2007-08/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/House/1574-S.SL.pdf?cite=2007%20c%20256%20§%2015); [2002 c 86 § 109](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/2001-02/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/House/2512-S.SL.pdf?cite=2002%20c%2086%20§%20109); \]

## 18.235.090 - Appeal.
A person who has been disciplined or has been denied a license by a disciplinary authority may appeal the decision as provided in chapter 34.05 RCW.

\[ [2007 c 256 § 16](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/2007-08/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/House/1574-S.SL.pdf?cite=2007%20c%20256%20§%2016); [2002 c 86 § 110](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/2001-02/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/House/2512-S.SL.pdf?cite=2002%20c%2086%20§%20110); \]

## 18.235.100 - Reinstatement.
A person whose license has been suspended or revoked under this chapter may petition the disciplinary authority for reinstatement after an interval of time and upon conditions determined by the disciplinary authority in the order suspending or revoking the license. The disciplinary authority shall act on the petition in accordance with the adjudicative proceedings provided under chapter 34.05 RCW and may impose such conditions as authorized by RCW 18.235.110. The disciplinary authority may require successful completion of an examination as a condition of reinstatement.

\[ [2007 c 256 § 17](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/2007-08/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/House/1574-S.SL.pdf?cite=2007%20c%20256%20§%2017); [2002 c 86 § 111](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/2001-02/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/House/2512-S.SL.pdf?cite=2002%20c%2086%20§%20111); \]

## 18.235.110 - Unprofessional conduct—Finding.
1. Upon finding unprofessional conduct, except as provided in RCW 9.97.020, the disciplinary authority may issue an order providing for one or any combination of the following:

   a. Revocation of the license for an interval of time;

   b. Suspension of the license for a fixed or indefinite term;

   c. Restriction or limitation of the practice;

   d. Satisfactory completion of a specific program of remedial education or treatment;

   e. Monitoring of the practice in a manner directed by the disciplinary authority;

   f. Censure or reprimand;

   g. Compliance with conditions of probation for a designated period of time;

   h. Payment of a fine for each violation found by the disciplinary authority, not to exceed five thousand dollars per violation. The disciplinary authority must consider aggravating or mitigating circumstances in assessing any fine. Funds received must be deposited in the related program account;

   i. Denial of an initial or renewal license application for an interval of time; or

   j. Other corrective action.

2. The disciplinary authority may require reimbursement to the disciplinary authority for the investigative costs incurred in investigating the matter that resulted in issuance of an order under this section, but only if any of the sanctions in subsection (1)(a) through (j) of this section is ordered.

3. Any of the actions under this section may be totally or partly stayed by the disciplinary authority. In determining what action is appropriate, the disciplinary authority must first consider what sanctions are necessary to protect the public health, safety, or welfare. Only after these provisions have been made may the disciplinary authority consider and include in the order requirements designed to rehabilitate the license holder or applicant. All costs associated with compliance with orders issued under this section are the obligation of the license holder or applicant.

4. The licensee or applicant may enter into a stipulated disposition of charges that includes one or more of the sanctions of this section, but only after a statement of charges has been issued and the licensee has been afforded the opportunity for a hearing and has elected on the record to forego such a hearing. The stipulation shall either contain one or more specific findings of unprofessional conduct or a statement by the licensee acknowledging that evidence is sufficient to justify one or more specified findings of unprofessional conduct. The stipulations entered into under this subsection are considered formal disciplinary action for all purposes.

\[ [2016 c 81 § 14](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/2015-16/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/House/1553-S.SL.pdf?cite=2016%20c%2081%20§%2014); [2007 c 256 § 18](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/2007-08/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/House/1574-S.SL.pdf?cite=2007%20c%20256%20§%2018); [2002 c 86 § 112](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/2001-02/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/House/2512-S.SL.pdf?cite=2002%20c%2086%20§%20112); \]

## 18.235.120 - Payment of a fine.
Where payment of a fine is required as a result of a disciplinary action under RCW 18.235.060 or 18.235.150 and timely payment is not made as directed in the final order, the disciplinary authority may enforce the order for payment in the superior court in the county in which the hearing was held. This right of enforcement is in addition to any other rights the disciplinary authority may have as to any licensee ordered to pay a fine but may not be construed to limit a licensee's ability to seek judicial review under RCW 18.235.090. In any action for enforcement of an order of payment of a fine, the disciplinary authority's order is conclusive proof of the validity of the order of a fine and the terms of payment.

\[ [2002 c 86 § 113](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/2001-02/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/House/2512-S.SL.pdf?cite=2002%20c%2086%20§%20113); \]

## 18.235.130 - Unprofessional conduct—Acts or conditions that constitute.
The following conduct, acts, or conditions constitute unprofessional conduct for any license holder or applicant under the jurisdiction of this chapter:

1. The commission of any act involving moral turpitude, dishonesty, or corruption relating to the practice of the person's profession or operation of the person's business, whether the act constitutes a crime or not. At the disciplinary hearing a certified copy of a final holding of any court of competent jurisdiction is conclusive evidence of the conduct of the license holder or applicant upon which a conviction or the final holding is based. Upon a conviction, however, the judgment and sentence is conclusive evidence at the ensuing disciplinary hearing of the guilt of the license holder or applicant of the crime described in the indictment or information, and of the person's violation of the statute on which it is based. For the purposes of this subsection, conviction includes all instances in which a plea of guilty or nolo contendere is the basis for the conviction and all proceedings in which the sentence has been deferred or suspended. Except as specifically provided by law, nothing in this subsection abrogates the provisions of chapter 9.96A RCW. However, RCW 9.96A.020 does not apply to a person who is required to register as a sex offender under RCW 9A.44.130;

2. Misrepresentation or concealment of a material fact in obtaining or renewing a license or in reinstatement thereof;

3. Advertising that is false, deceptive, or misleading;

4. Incompetence, negligence, or malpractice that results in harm or damage to another or that creates an unreasonable risk of harm or damage to another;

5. The suspension, revocation, or restriction of a license to engage in any business or profession by competent authority in any state, federal, or foreign jurisdiction. A certified copy of the order, stipulation, or agreement is conclusive evidence of the revocation, suspension, or restriction;

6. Failure to cooperate with the disciplinary authority in the course of an investigation, audit, or inspection authorized by law by:

   a. Not furnishing any papers or documents requested by the disciplinary authority;

   b. Not furnishing in writing an explanation covering the matter contained in a complaint when requested by the disciplinary authority;

   c. Not responding to a subpoena issued by the disciplinary authority, whether or not the recipient of the subpoena is the accused in the proceeding; or

   d. Not providing authorized access, during regular business hours, to representatives of the disciplinary authority conducting an investigation, inspection, or audit at facilities utilized by the license holder or applicant;

7. Failure to comply with an order issued by the disciplinary authority;

8. Violating any of the provisions of this chapter or the chapters specified in RCW 18.235.020(2) or any rules made by the disciplinary authority under the chapters specified in RCW 18.235.020(2);

9. Aiding or abetting an unlicensed person to practice or operate a business or profession when a license is required;

10. Practice or operation of a business or profession beyond the scope of practice or operation as defined by law or rule;

11. Misrepresentation in any aspect of the conduct of the business or profession;

12. Failure to adequately supervise or oversee auxiliary staff, whether employees or contractors, to the extent that consumers may be harmed or damaged;

13. Conviction of any gross misdemeanor or felony relating to the practice of the person's profession or operation of the person's business. For the purposes of this subsection, conviction includes all instances in which a plea of guilty or nolo contendere is the basis for conviction and all proceedings in which the sentence has been deferred or suspended. Except as specifically provided by law, nothing in this subsection abrogates the provisions of chapter 9.96A RCW. However, RCW 9.96A.020 does not apply to a person who is required to register as a sex offender under RCW 9A.44.130; 

14. Interference with an investigation or disciplinary action by willful misrepresentation of facts before the disciplinary authority or its authorized representatives, or by the use of threats or harassment against any consumer or witness to discourage them from providing evidence in a disciplinary action or any other legal action, or by the use of financial inducements to any consumer or witness to prevent or attempt to prevent him or her from providing evidence in a disciplinary action; and

15. Engaging in unlicensed practice as defined in RCW 18.235.010.

\[ [2007 c 256 § 19](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/2007-08/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/House/1574-S.SL.pdf?cite=2007%20c%20256%20§%2019); [2002 c 86 § 114](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/2001-02/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/House/2512-S.SL.pdf?cite=2002%20c%2086%20§%20114); \]

## 18.235.140 - Final order issued under RCW  18.235.130—Failure to comply.
If a person or business regulated by this chapter violates or fails to comply with a final order issued under RCW 18.235.130, the attorney general, any prosecuting attorney, the director, the board or commission, or any other person may maintain an action in the name of the state of Washington to enjoin the person from violating the order or failing to comply with the order. The injunction does not relieve the offender from criminal prosecution, but the remedy by injunction is in addition to the liability of the offender to criminal prosecution and disciplinary action.

\[ [2002 c 86 § 115](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/2001-02/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/House/2512-S.SL.pdf?cite=2002%20c%2086%20§%20115); \]

## 18.235.150 - Investigation of complaint—Cease and desist order/notice of intent to issue—Final determination—Fine—Temporary cease and desist order—Action/who may maintain—Remedies not limited.
1. The disciplinary authority may investigate complaints concerning practice by unlicensed persons of a profession or business for which a license is required by the chapters specified in RCW 18.235.020. In the investigation of the complaints, the director has the same authority as provided the disciplinary authority under RCW 18.235.030.

2. The disciplinary authority may issue a notice of intent to issue a cease and desist order to any person whom the disciplinary authority has reason to believe is engaged or is about to engage in the unlicensed practice of a profession or operation of a business for which a license is required by the chapters specified in RCW 18.235.020.

3. The disciplinary authority may issue a notice of intent to issue a cease and desist order to any person whom the disciplinary authority has reason to believe is engaged or is about to engage in an act or practice constituting a violation of this chapter or the chapters specified in RCW 18.235.020(2) or a rule adopted or order issued under those chapters.

4. The person to whom such a notice is issued may request an adjudicative proceeding to contest the allegations. The notice shall include a brief, plain statement of the alleged unlicensed activities, act, or practice constituting a violation of this chapter or the chapters specified in RCW 18.235.020(2) or a rule adopted or order issued under those chapters. The request for hearing must be filed within twenty days after service of the notice of intent to issue a cease and desist order. The failure to request a hearing constitutes a default, whereupon the disciplinary authority may enter a permanent cease and desist order, which may include a civil fine. All proceedings shall be conducted in accordance with chapter 34.05 RCW.

5. If the disciplinary authority makes a final determination that a person has engaged or is engaging in unlicensed practice or other act or practice constituting a violation of this chapter or the chapters specified in RCW 18.235.020(2) or a rule adopted or order issued under those chapters, the disciplinary authority may issue a permanent cease and desist order. In addition, the disciplinary authority may impose a civil fine in an amount not exceeding one thousand dollars for each day upon which the person engaged in the unlicensed practice of a profession or operation of a business for which a license is required by one or more of the chapters specified in RCW 18.235.020. The proceeds of such a fine shall be deposited in the related program account.

6. The disciplinary authority may issue a temporary cease and desist order if a person is engaged or is about to engage in unlicensed practice or other act or practice constituting a violation of this chapter or the chapters specified in RCW 18.235.020(2) or a rule adopted or order issued under those chapters if the disciplinary authority makes a written finding of fact that the public interest will be irreparably harmed by delay in issuing an order. The person receiving a temporary cease and desist order shall be provided an opportunity for a prompt hearing. A temporary cease and desist order shall remain in effect until further order of the disciplinary authority. The failure to request a prompt or regularly scheduled hearing constitutes a default, whereupon the disciplinary authority may enter a permanent cease and desist order, which may include a civil fine.

7. The cease and desist order is conclusive proof of unlicensed practice or other act or practice constituting a violation of this chapter or the chapters specified in RCW 18.235.020(2) or a rule adopted or order issued under those chapters and may be enforced under RCW 7.21.060. This method of enforcement of the cease and desist order or civil fine may be used in addition to, or as an alternative to, any provisions for enforcement of agency orders set out in chapter 34.05 RCW.

8. The attorney general, a county prosecuting attorney, the director, a board or commission, or any person may, in accordance with the laws of this state governing injunctions, maintain an action in the name of the state of Washington to enjoin any person practicing a profession or business without a license for which a license is required by the chapters specified in RCW 18.235.020. All fees, fines, forfeitures, and penalties collected or assessed by a court because of a violation of this section shall be deposited in the related program account.

9. The civil remedies in this section do not limit the ability to pursue criminal prosecution as authorized in any of the acts specified in RCW 18.235.020 nor do the civil remedies limit any criminal sanctions.

\[ [2007 c 256 § 20](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/2007-08/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/House/1574-S.SL.pdf?cite=2007%20c%20256%20§%2020); [2002 c 86 § 116](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/2001-02/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/House/2512-S.SL.pdf?cite=2002%20c%2086%20§%20116); \]

## 18.235.160 - Violation of injunction—Contempt of court—Civil penalty.
A person or business that violates an injunction issued under this chapter may be found in contempt of court under RCW 7.21.010. Upon a finding by a court of competent jurisdiction that the person or business is in contempt, the court may order any remedial sanction as authorized by RCW 7.21.030. Further, the court may, in addition to the remedial sanctions available under RCW 7.21.030, order the person or business to pay a civil penalty to the state in an amount not to exceed twenty-five thousand dollars, which shall be deposited in the related program account. For the purposes of this section, the superior court issuing any injunction retains jurisdiction and the cause shall be continued, and in such cases the attorney general acting in the name of the state may petition for the recovery of civil penalties.

\[ [2002 c 86 § 117](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/2001-02/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/House/2512-S.SL.pdf?cite=2002%20c%2086%20§%20117); \]

## 18.235.170 - Misrepresentation—Gross misdemeanor.
A person who attempts to obtain, obtains, or attempts to maintain a license by willful misrepresentation or fraudulent representation is guilty of a gross misdemeanor.

\[ [2002 c 86 § 118](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/2001-02/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/House/2512-S.SL.pdf?cite=2002%20c%2086%20§%20118); \]

## 18.235.180 - Crime or violation by license holder—Disciplinary authority may give notification.
If the disciplinary authority has reason to believe that a license holder has committed a crime, or violated the laws of another regulatory body, the disciplinary authority may notify the attorney general or the county prosecuting attorney in the county in which the act took place, or other responsible official of the facts known to the disciplinary authority.

\[ [2002 c 86 § 119](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/2001-02/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/House/2512-S.SL.pdf?cite=2002%20c%2086%20§%20119); \]

## 18.235.190 - Immunity from suit.
The director, members of the boards or commissions, or individuals acting on their behalf are immune from suit in any action, civil or criminal, based on any disciplinary actions or other official acts performed in the course of their duties.

\[ [2002 c 86 § 120](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/2001-02/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/House/2512-S.SL.pdf?cite=2002%20c%2086%20§%20120); \]

## 18.235.200 - Use of records—Exchange of information—Chapter does not affect or limit.
This chapter does not affect the use of records, obtained from the director or the disciplinary authorities, in any existing investigation or action by any public agency. Nor does this chapter limit any existing exchange of information between the director or the disciplinary authorities and other public agencies.

\[ [2002 c 86 § 121](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/2001-02/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/House/2512-S.SL.pdf?cite=2002%20c%2086%20§%20121); \]

## 18.235.210 - Application of chapter—January 1, 2003.
1. This chapter applies to any conduct, acts, or conditions occurring on or after January 1, 2003.

2. This chapter does not apply to or govern the construction of and disciplinary action for any conduct, acts, or conditions occurring prior to January 1, 2003. The conduct, acts, or conditions must be construed and disciplinary action taken according to the provisions of law existing at the time of the occurrence in the same manner as if this chapter had not been enacted.

3. Notwithstanding subsection (2) of this section, this chapter applies to applications for licensure made on or after January 1, 2003.

\[ [2007 c 256 § 21](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/2007-08/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/House/1574-S.SL.pdf?cite=2007%20c%20256%20§%2021); [2002 c 86 § 122](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/2001-02/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/House/2512-S.SL.pdf?cite=2002%20c%2086%20§%20122); \]

## 18.235.215 - Application of chapter to notarial officers.
See RCW 42.45.270.

\[ \]

## 18.235.900 - Short title.
This chapter may be known and cited as the uniform regulation of business and professions act.

\[ [2002 c 86 § 123](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/2001-02/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/House/2512-S.SL.pdf?cite=2002%20c%2086%20§%20123); \]

## 18.235.901 - Effective date—2002 c 86 §§ 101-123.
Sections 101 through 123 of this act take effect January 1, 2003.

\[ [2002 c 86 § 124](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/2001-02/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/House/2512-S.SL.pdf?cite=2002%20c%2086%20§%20124); \]

## 18.235.902 - Part headings not law—2002 c 86.
Part headings used in this act are not any part of the law.

\[ [2002 c 86 § 402](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/2001-02/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/House/2512-S.SL.pdf?cite=2002%20c%2086%20§%20402); \]

## 18.235.903 - Severability—2002 c 86.
If any provision of this act or its application to any person or circumstance is held invalid, the remainder of the act or the application of the provision to other persons or circumstances is not affected.

\[ [2002 c 86 § 404](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/2001-02/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/House/2512-S.SL.pdf?cite=2002%20c%2086%20§%20404); \]

