# 5.62 - Witnesses—Registered nurses.
* [5.62.010 - Definitions.](#562010---definitions)
* [5.62.020 - Registered nurse—Privileged communications—Exceptions.](#562020---registered-nurseprivileged-communicationsexceptions)
* [5.62.030 - Nurse-patient privilege subject to limitations and exemptions of physician-patient privilege.](#562030---nurse-patient-privilege-subject-to-limitations-and-exemptions-of-physician-patient-privilege)
## 5.62.010 - Definitions.
Unless the context clearly requires otherwise, the definitions in this section apply throughout this chapter.

1. "Registered nurse" means a registered nurse or advanced nurse practitioner licensed under chapter 18.79 RCW.

2. "Protocol" means a regimen to be carried out by a registered nurse and prescribed by a licensed physician under chapter 18.71 RCW, or a licensed osteopathic physician under chapter 18.57 RCW, which is consistent with chapter 18.79 RCW and the rules adopted under that chapter.

3. "Primary care" means screening, assessment, diagnosis, and treatment for the purpose of promotion of health and detection of disease or injury, as authorized by chapter 18.79 RCW and the rules adopted under that chapter.

\[ [1994 sp.s. c 9 § 703](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/1993-94/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/House/2676-S.SL.pdf?cite=1994%20sp.s.%20c%209%20§%20703); [1987 c 198 § 1](https://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1987c198.pdf?cite=1987%20c%20198%20§%201); [1985 c 447 § 1](https://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1985c447.pdf?cite=1985%20c%20447%20§%201); \]

## 5.62.020 - Registered nurse—Privileged communications—Exceptions.
No registered nurse providing primary care or practicing under protocols, whether or not the physical presence or direct supervision of a physician is required, may be examined in a civil or criminal action as to any information acquired in attending a patient in the registered nurse's professional capacity, if the information was necessary to enable the registered nurse to act in that capacity for the patient, unless:

1. The patient consents to disclosure or, in the event of death or disability of the patient, his or her personal representative, heir, beneficiary, or devisee consents to disclosure; or

2. The information relates to the contemplation or execution of a crime in the future, or relates to the neglect or the sexual or physical abuse of a child, or of a vulnerable adult as defined in RCW 74.34.020, or to a person subject to proceedings under chapter *70.96A, 71.05, or 71.34 RCW.

\[ [1989 c 271 § 302](https://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1989c271.pdf?cite=1989%20c%20271%20§%20302); [1986 c 212 § 1](https://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1986c212.pdf?cite=1986%20c%20212%20§%201); [1985 c 447 § 2](https://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1985c447.pdf?cite=1985%20c%20447%20§%202); \]

## 5.62.030 - Nurse-patient privilege subject to limitations and exemptions of physician-patient privilege.
Notwithstanding anything to the contrary in this chapter, the privilege created in this chapter is subject to the same limitations and exemptions contained in RCW 26.44.060(3) and 51.04.050 as those limitations and exemptions relate to the physician/patient privilege of RCW 5.60.060.

\[ [2002 c 302 § 702](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/2001-02/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/House/2346-S2.SL.pdf?cite=2002%20c%20302%20§%20702); [1986 c 212 § 2](https://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1986c212.pdf?cite=1986%20c%20212%20§%202); [1985 c 447 § 3](https://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1985c447.pdf?cite=1985%20c%20447%20§%203); \]

