# 48.28 - Surety insurance.
* [48.28.010 - Requirements deemed met by surety insurer.](#4828010---requirements-deemed-met-by-surety-insurer)
* [48.28.020 - Fiduciary bonds—Premium as lawful expense.](#4828020---fiduciary-bondspremium-as-lawful-expense)
* [48.28.030 - Judicial bonds—Premium as part of recoverable costs.](#4828030---judicial-bondspremium-as-part-of-recoverable-costs)
* [48.28.040 - Official bonds—Payment of premiums.](#4828040---official-bondspayment-of-premiums)
* [48.28.050 - Release from liability.](#4828050---release-from-liability)
## 48.28.010 - Requirements deemed met by surety insurer.
Whenever by law or by rule of any court, public official, or public body, any surety bond, recognizance, obligation, stipulation or undertaking is required or is permitted to be given, any such bond, recognizance, obligation, stipulation, or undertaking which is otherwise proper and the conditions of which are guaranteed by an authorized surety insurer, or by an unauthorized surety insurer as a surplus line pursuant to chapter 48.15 RCW of this code, shall be approved and accepted and shall be deemed to fulfill all requirements as to number of sureties, residence or status of sureties, and other similar requirements, and no justification by such surety shall be necessary.

\[ 1947 c 79 § .28.01; Rem. Supp. 1947 § 45.28.01; \]

## 48.28.020 - Fiduciary bonds—Premium as lawful expense.
Any fiduciary required by law to give bonds, may include as part of his or her lawful expense to be allowed by the court or official by whom he or she was appointed, the reasonable amount paid as premium for such bonds to the authorized surety insurer or to the surplus line surety insurer which issued or guaranteed such bonds.

\[ [2009 c 549 § 7117](https://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/2009-10/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/Senate/5038.SL.pdf?cite=2009%20c%20549%20§%207117); [1955 c 30 § 1](https://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1955c30.pdf?cite=1955%20c%2030%20§%201); 1947 c 79 § .28.02; Rem. Supp. 1947 § 45.28.02; \]

## 48.28.030 - Judicial bonds—Premium as part of recoverable costs.
In any proceeding the party entitled to recover costs may include therein such reasonable sum as was paid to such surety insurer as premium for any bond or undertaking required therein, and as may be allowed by the court having jurisdiction of such proceeding.

\[ [1955 c 30 § 2](https://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1955c30.pdf?cite=1955%20c%2030%20§%202); 1947 c 79 § .28.03; Rem. Supp. 1947 § 45.28.03; \]

## 48.28.040 - Official bonds—Payment of premiums.
The premium for bonds given by such surety insurers for appointive or elective public officers and for such of their deputies or employees as are required to give bond shall be paid by the state, political subdivision, or public body so served.

\[ [1955 c 30 § 3](https://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1955c30.pdf?cite=1955%20c%2030%20§%203); 1947 c 79 § .28.04; Rem. Supp. 1947 § 45.28.04; \]

## 48.28.050 - Release from liability.
A surety insurer may be released from its liability on the same terms and conditions as are provided by law for the release of individuals as sureties.

\[ 1947 c 79 § .28.05; Rem. Supp. 1947 § 45.28.05; \]

