# 48.177 - Commercial transportation services.
* [48.177.005 - Definitions.](#48177005---definitions)
## 48.177.005 - Definitions.
The definitions in this section apply throughout this chapter unless the context clearly requires otherwise.

1. "Commercial transportation services" or "services" means all times the driver is logged in to a commercial transportation services provider's digital network or software application or until the passenger has left the personal vehicle, whichever is later. The term does not include services provided either directly or under contract with a political subdivision or other entity exempt from federal income tax under 26 U.S.C. Sec. 115 of the federal internal revenue code.

2. "Commercial transportation services provider" means a corporation, partnership, sole proprietorship, or other entity, operating in Washington, that uses a digital network or software application to connect passengers to drivers for the purpose of providing a prearranged ride. However, a commercial transportation services provider is not a taxicab company under chapter 81.72 RCW, a charter party or excursion service carrier under chapter 81.70 RCW, an auto transportation company under chapter 81.68 RCW, a private, nonprofit transportation provider under chapter 81.66 RCW, a limousine carrier under chapter 46.72A RCW, or a commuter ride-sharing or flexible commuter ride-sharing arrangement under chapter 46.74 RCW. A commercial transportation services provider is not deemed to own, control, operate, or manage the personal vehicles used by commercial transportation services providers. A commercial transportation services provider does not include a political subdivision or other entity exempt from federal income tax under 26 U.S.C. Sec. 115 of the federal internal revenue code.

3. "Commercial transportation services provider driver" or "driver" means an individual who uses a personal vehicle to provide services for passengers matched through a commercial transportation services provider's digital network or software application.

4. "Commercial transportation services provider passenger" or "passenger" means a passenger in a personal vehicle for whom transport is provided, including:

   a. An individual who uses a commercial transportation services provider's digital network or software application to connect with a driver to obtain services in the driver's vehicle for the individual and anyone in the individual's party; or

   b. Anyone for whom another individual uses a commercial transportation services provider's digital network or software application to connect with a driver to obtain services in the driver's vehicle.

5. "Personal vehicle" means a vehicle that is used by a commercial transportation services provider driver in connection with providing services for a commercial transportation services provider and that is authorized by the commercial transportation services provider.

6. "Prearranged ride" means a route of travel between points chosen by the passenger and arranged with a driver through the use of a commercial transportation services provider's digital network or software application. The ride begins when a driver accepts a requested ride through a digital network or software application, continues while the driver transports the passenger in a personal vehicle, and ends when the passenger departs from the personal vehicle.

\[ [2016 c 21 ยง 1](https://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/2015-16/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/House/2516.SL.pdf?cite=2016%20c%2021%20ยง%201); [2015 c 236 ยง 1](https://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/2015-16/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/Senate/5550-S.SL.pdf?cite=2015%20c%20236%20ยง%201); \]

