# Engrossed Substitute Senate Bill 5193 as Recommended by Labor, Commerce & Tribal Affairs - as passed by the Legislature

[Source](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/2021-22/Xml/Bills/Senate%20Passed%20Legislature/5193-S.PL.xml)
## Section 1
The legislature finds with roughly $4,700,000,000 in the state unemployment insurance trust fund, Washington entered the COVID-19 pandemic with one of the strongest and best-funded trust funds in the nation. During an unprecedented time, the state's unemployment insurance trust fund provided critical economic support to Washington workers and businesses through unemployment benefits and helped bolster the state's economy.
The legislature recognizes that the employment security department maintains a recession readiness team that prepares the agency to respond to economic changes, helping employers and employees plan for the future. Based on experience with past recessions, the employment security department's readiness team prepared contingency plans for a possible economic crisis. During the great recession, there were approximately 61,000 continued unemployment insurance claims in September 2008, rising to a high of approximately 173,000 claims in January of 2010, a period of 16 months. During the first three months of COVID-19, unemployment insurance claims were more than double those filed during the great recession, a time period that was seven times longer. From February 2020 to April 2020, unemployment insurance claims went from approximately 62,000 to approximately 447,000 claims. The sudden magnitude of claimants overwhelmed the system; contributing to Washingtonians waiting months for their earned benefits and facing deep economic insecurity.
The legislature finds that, despite conscientious economic emergency planning by the employment security department, claims processing issues are central problems encumbering the employment security department's ability to timely meet a suddenly increased demand for benefits. Immediate additional measures to facilitate rapid and equitable provision of unemployment benefits now, and enhanced preparation to do so in future economic downturns or emergencies, are critically important.
The legislature further finds that a federal retroactive funding model that looks back instead of preparing for potential economic shocks ahead was a major contributing factor to the challenges faced by all states during the COVID-19 pandemic in quickly paying benefits to unemployed workers. Our employment security department cannot quickly scale up for increased workloads and new programs if its administrative funding is based on funding that looks backward instead of forward.
Amid an unprecedented need for benefits and stresses on our unemployment insurance program, the legislature intends to create a pool of qualified unemployment insurance claim adjudicators, reduce claimants' need for assistance, assure transparency of claims processing performance measures, and make other system enhancements. Together, these systems enhancements will ensure quicker claim resolution and benefit payment; thus providing critical economic support during future unemployment crises.

## Section 5
(a) The department's progress in implementing this act;
(b) Updates on any new federal programs or funds received by the department for unemployment compensation and administration and the use of such funds;
(c) Any software or technology issues related to claims processing, including any issues causing claim delays or inaccurate automated notifications;
(d) Updates on the department's protocols and process for protecting sensitive data; and
(e) Any other relevant unemployment issues, or information related to enhancing the unemployment insurance system, as determined by the department.
(2) This section expires December 1, 2022.
