# 39.60 - Investment of funds in bonds, notes, etc.—Collateral.
* [39.60.010 - Investment of trust funds authorized.](#3960010---investment-of-trust-funds-authorized)
* [39.60.020 - Exchange of securities for federal agency bonds.](#3960020---exchange-of-securities-for-federal-agency-bonds)
* [39.60.030 - Obligations eligible as collateral security.](#3960030---obligations-eligible-as-collateral-security)
* [39.60.040 - Insured shares, deposits or accounts as collateral—Partially guaranteed obligations.](#3960040---insured-shares-deposits-or-accounts-as-collateralpartially-guaranteed-obligations)
* [39.60.050 - Investment of trust funds in notes, bonds, or debentures authorized—Requirements.](#3960050---investment-of-trust-funds-in-notes-bonds-or-debentures-authorizedrequirements)
## 39.60.010 - Investment of trust funds authorized.
Notwithstanding the provisions of any other statute of the state of Washington to the contrary, it shall be lawful for any insurance company, savings and loan association, or for any bank, trust company or other financial institution, operating under the laws of the state of Washington, or for any executor, administrator, guardian or conservator, trustee or other fiduciary to invest its funds or the moneys in its custody or possession, eligible for investment, in notes or bonds secured by mortgage which the Federal Housing Administrator has insured or has made a commitment to insure in obligations of national mortgage associations, in debentures issued by the Federal Housing Administrator, and in the bonds of the Home Owner's Loan Corporation, a corporation organized under and by virtue of the authority granted in H.R. 5240, designated as the Home Owner's Loan Act of 1933, passed by the congress of the United States and approved June 13, 1933, and in bonds of any other corporation which is or hereafter may be created by the United States, as a governmental agency or instrumentality.

\[ [2016 c 152 § 13](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/2015-16/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/Senate/6349.SL.pdf?cite=2016%20c%20152%20§%2013); [1939 c 32 § 1](https://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1939c32.pdf?cite=1939%20c%2032%20§%201); [1935 c 11 § 1](https://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1935c11.pdf?cite=1935%20c%2011%20§%201); [1933 ex.s. c 37 § 1](https://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1933ex1c37.pdf?cite=1933%20ex.s.%20c%2037%20§%201); RRS § 5545-1; \]

## 39.60.020 - Exchange of securities for federal agency bonds.
Notwithstanding the provisions of any other statute of the state of Washington to the contrary, it shall be also lawful for any insurance company, savings and loan association, building and loan association, or for any bank, trust company or other financial institution, operating under the laws of the state of Washington, or for any executor, administrator, guardian or conservator, trustee or other fiduciary, to exchange any mortgages, contracts, judgments or liens owned or held by it, for the bonds of the Home Owners' Loan Corporation, a corporation organized under and by virtue of the authority granted in H.R. 5240, designated as The Home Owners' Loan Act of 1933, passed by the congress of the United States and approved June 13, 1933, or for the bonds of any other corporation which is or hereafter may be created by the United States as a governmental agency or instrumentality; and to accept said bonds at their par value in any such exchange.

\[ [2016 c 152 § 14](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/2015-16/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/Senate/6349.SL.pdf?cite=2016%20c%20152%20§%2014); [1933 ex.s. c 37 § 2](https://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1933ex1c37.pdf?cite=1933%20ex.s.%20c%2037%20§%202); RRS § 5545-2; \]

## 39.60.030 - Obligations eligible as collateral security.
Wherever, by statute of this state, collateral is required as security for the deposit of funds; or deposits are required to be made with any public official or department; or an investment of capital or surplus, or a reserve or other fund is required to be maintained consisting of designated securities, the bonds and other securities herein made eligible for investment shall also be eligible for such purpose.

\[ [2016 c 152 § 15](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/2015-16/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/Senate/6349.SL.pdf?cite=2016%20c%20152%20§%2015); [1939 c 32 § 2](https://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1939c32.pdf?cite=1939%20c%2032%20§%202); [1935 c 11 § 2](https://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1935c11.pdf?cite=1935%20c%2011%20§%202); [1933 ex.s. c 37 § 3](https://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1933ex1c37.pdf?cite=1933%20ex.s.%20c%2037%20§%203); RRS § 5545-3; \]

## 39.60.040 - Insured shares, deposits or accounts as collateral—Partially guaranteed obligations.
The obligations issued pursuant to said Federal Home Loan Bank Act and to said Title IV of the National Housing Act as such acts are now or hereafter amended, and the shares, deposits or accounts of any institution which has the insurance protection provided by Title IV of the National Housing Act, as now or hereafter amended, may be used at face value or withdrawal value, and bonds or other interest bearing obligations as to which the payment of some but less than the full principal and interest is guaranteed by the United States of America or any agency thereof may be used to the extent of the portion so guaranteed, wherever, by statute of this state or otherwise, collateral is required as security for the deposit of funds, or deposits are required to be made with any public official or department, or an investment of capital or surplus, or a reserve or other fund, is required to be maintained consisting of designated security, or wherever by statute of this state or otherwise, any surety, whether personal, corporate, or otherwise, or any collateral or security, is required or permitted for any purpose, including without limitation on the generality of the foregoing, any bond, recognizance, or undertaking.

\[ [2016 c 152 § 16](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/2015-16/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/Senate/6349.SL.pdf?cite=2016%20c%20152%20§%2016); [1967 ex.s. c 48 § 1](https://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1967ex1c48.pdf?cite=1967%20ex.s.%20c%2048%20§%201); [1941 c 249 § 2](https://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1941c249.pdf?cite=1941%20c%20249%20§%202); Rem. Supp. 1941 § 3791-2; \]

## 39.60.050 - Investment of trust funds in notes, bonds, or debentures authorized—Requirements.
Notwithstanding the provisions of any other statute of the state of Washington to the contrary, it shall be lawful for any executor, administrator, guardian, or conservator, trustee or other fiduciary, to invest its funds or the moneys in its custody or possession, eligible for investment, in notes, bonds, or debentures of savings and loan associations, banks, mutual savings banks, savings and loan service corporations operating with approval of the federal home loan bank, and corporate mortgage companies: PROVIDED, That the notes, bonds or debentures are rated not less than "A" by a nationally recognized rating agency, or are insured or guaranteed by an agency of the federal government or by private insurer authorized to do business in the state: PROVIDED FURTHER, That the notes, bonds and debentures insured or guaranteed by a private insurer shall also be backed by a pool of mortgages equal to the amount of the notes, bonds or debentures.

\[ [2016 c 152 § 17](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/2015-16/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/Senate/6349.SL.pdf?cite=2016%20c%20152%20§%2017); [1970 ex.s. c 93 § 1](https://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1970ex1c93.pdf?cite=1970%20ex.s.%20c%2093%20§%201); \]

