# 39.52 - Funding indebtedness in counties, cities, and towns.
* [39.52.010 - Issuance of funding bonds authorized.](#3952010---issuance-of-funding-bonds-authorized)
* [39.52.015 - Validation of prior bond issues.](#3952015---validation-of-prior-bond-issues)
* [39.52.020 - Limitations on issuance of bonds.](#3952020---limitations-on-issuance-of-bonds)
* [39.52.035 - Tax levy—Purpose.](#3952035---tax-levypurpose)
* [39.52.050 - "Corporate authorities" defined.](#3952050---corporate-authorities-defined)
## 39.52.010 - Issuance of funding bonds authorized.
Any county, city, or town in the state of Washington which now has or may hereafter have an outstanding indebtedness evidenced by warrants or bonds, including warrants or bonds of any county, city, or town which are special fund obligations of and constitute a lien upon the waterworks or other public utilities of such county, city, or town, and are payable only from the income or funds derived or to be derived therefrom, whether issued originally within the limitations of the Constitution of this state, or of any law thereof, or whether such outstanding indebtedness has been or may hereafter be validated or legalized in the manner prescribed by law, may, by its corporate authorities, provide by ordinance or resolution for the issuance of funding bonds with which to take up and cancel such outstanding indebtedness in the manner hereinafter described, said bonds to constitute general obligations of such county, city, or town: PROVIDED, That special fund obligations payable only from the income funds of the public utility, shall not be refunded by the issuance of general municipal bonds where voter approval is required before general municipal bonds may be issued for such public utility purposes, unless such general municipal bonds shall have been previously authorized. Nothing in this chapter shall be so construed as to prevent any such county, city, or town from funding its indebtedness as now provided by law.

\[ [1995 2nd sp.s. c 17 § 6](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/1995-96/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/House/1071-S.SL.pdf?cite=1995%202nd%20sp.s.%20c%2017%20§%206); [1984 c 186 § 36](http://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1984c186.pdf?cite=1984%20c%20186%20§%2036); [1917 c 145 § 1](http://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1917c145.pdf?cite=1917%20c%20145%20§%201); [1895 c 170 § 1](http://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1895c170.pdf?cite=1895%20c%20170%20§%201); RRS § 5617; \]

## 39.52.015 - Validation of prior bond issues.
That all bonds heretofore voted or issued, and which may have been or may hereafter be issued by any county, city or town, for any of the purposes authorized by the preceding section as hereby amended, including general fund bonds issued for the purpose of refunding special utility fund bonds or warrants, shall be validated and have the same force and effect as though said section had been in full force and effect at the time said bonds were either authorized or issued.

\[ [1917 c 145 § 2](http://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1917c145.pdf?cite=1917%20c%20145%20§%202); RRS § 5618; \]

## 39.52.020 - Limitations on issuance of bonds.
No bonds issued under this chapter shall be issued for a longer period than twenty years. Nothing in this chapter shall be deemed to authorize the issuing of any funding bonds which exceeds any constitutional or statutory limitations of indebtedness. Such bonds shall be issued and sold in accordance with chapters 39.46 and 39.53 RCW, exclusive of RCW 39.53.120.

\[ [1995 2nd sp.s. c 17 § 7](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/1995-96/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/House/1071-S.SL.pdf?cite=1995%202nd%20sp.s.%20c%2017%20§%207); [1984 c 186 § 37](http://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1984c186.pdf?cite=1984%20c%20186%20§%2037); [1983 c 167 § 113](http://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1983c167.pdf?cite=1983%20c%20167%20§%20113); [1970 ex.s. c 56 § 60](http://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1970ex1c56.pdf?cite=1970%20ex.s.%20c%2056%20§%2060); [1969 ex.s. c 232 § 31](http://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1969ex1c232.pdf?cite=1969%20ex.s.%20c%20232%20§%2031); [1895 c 170 § 2](http://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1895c170.pdf?cite=1895%20c%20170%20§%202); RRS § 5619; \]

## 39.52.035 - Tax levy—Purpose.
The corporate authorities of any such county, city or town shall provide annually by ordinance or resolution for the levy and extension on the tax rolls of such county, city or town, and for the collection thereof, of a direct annual tax in addition to all other county, city or town taxes to be levied according to law, which shall be sufficient to meet the interest on all of said bonds promptly as the same matures, and also sufficient to fully pay each series of bonds as the same matures: PROVIDED, That such ordinance or resolution shall not be repealed until the levy therein provided for shall be fully paid, or the bonds both principal and interest shall be paid or canceled.

\[ [1895 c 170 § 4](http://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1895c170.pdf?cite=1895%20c%20170%20§%204); RRS § 5621; \]

## 39.52.050 - "Corporate authorities" defined.
The words "corporate authorities", used in this chapter, shall be held to mean the county legislative authority, or the council or commission of the city or town.

\[ [1984 c 186 § 38](http://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1984c186.pdf?cite=1984%20c%20186%20§%2038); [1895 c 170 § 6](http://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1895c170.pdf?cite=1895%20c%20170%20§%206); RRS § 5623; \]

