# 39.48 - Bonds sold to government at private sale.
* [39.48.010 - Authority conferred.](#3948010---authority-conferred)
* [39.48.020 - Amortization—Requirements relaxed.](#3948020---amortizationrequirements-relaxed)
* [39.48.030 - "Issuer" defined.](#3948030---issuer-defined)
* [39.48.040 - Chapter optional.](#3948040---chapter-optional)
## 39.48.010 - Authority conferred.
Bonds and securities of all kinds heretofore or hereafter authorized, issued by any issuing corporation or district (hereinafter called the "issuer" and as hereinafter specified), whether such bonds and securities be issued for such issuer itself or for any other taxing or assessment district within its limits, and whether payable in whole or in part out of and from general taxes or payable in whole or in part out of and from the earnings to be derived from any utility, system, construction, work, or works, belonging to or operated by any such issuer, or payable in whole or in part out of and from "local" or "benefit" assessments upon lands within any assessment district or assessment subdivision within any such issuer, may be sold to the United States government or to any department, corporation or agency thereof by private sale without giving any prior notice thereof by publication or otherwise and in such manner as the governing authority of such issuer may provide: PROVIDED, Only that bonds or other securities sold at private sale under the authority of this chapter shall bear interest at a rate or rates as authorized by the issuer and that all bonds and securities sold and issued under the authority of this chapter shall be sold, if now required by existing law, at not less than par and accrued interest.

\[ [1970 ex.s. c 56 § 59](http://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1970ex1c56.pdf?cite=1970%20ex.s.%20c%2056%20§%2059); [1969 ex.s. c 232 § 76](http://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1969ex1c232.pdf?cite=1969%20ex.s.%20c%20232%20§%2076); [1933 ex.s. c 30 § 1](http://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1933ex1c30.pdf?cite=1933%20ex.s.%20c%2030%20§%201); RRS § 5583-11; \]

## 39.48.020 - Amortization—Requirements relaxed.
It shall be proper to provide with respect to any bonds now required to be amortized as provided by *RCW 39.44.010 through 39.44.080, that such amortized annual maturities shall commence to be payable at any time on or before five years from the date of said bonds, and that any bonds, or any part thereof, issued under the authority of this chapter, shall be redeemable prior to their fixed maturities, as provided by the governing board or authority of any such issuer.

\[ [1933 ex.s. c 30 § 2](http://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1933ex1c30.pdf?cite=1933%20ex.s.%20c%2030%20§%202); RRS § 5583-12; \]

## 39.48.030 - "Issuer" defined.
The issuing corporations, districts, and subdivisions hereinbefore referred to and described as "issuer", shall include any county, city, town, school district, port district, metropolitan park district, taxing district, assessment district or any public corporation or municipal corporation authorized by existing law to issue bonds, securities or other evidences of indebtedness for itself or for any other taxing or assessment district therein or department thereof.

\[ [1933 ex.s. c 30 § 3](http://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1933ex1c30.pdf?cite=1933%20ex.s.%20c%2030%20§%203); RRS § 5583-13; \]

## 39.48.040 - Chapter optional.
It shall be optional with any such issuer, at its discretion, to exercise all or any of the powers conferred by this chapter in connection with the adoption and exercise by any such issuer of the provisions and powers granted by existing law.

\[ [1933 ex.s. c 30 § 4](http://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1933ex1c30.pdf?cite=1933%20ex.s.%20c%2030%20§%204); RRS § 5583-14; \]

