# 43.41 - Office of financial management.
* [43.41.030 - Purpose.](#4341030---purpose)
* [43.41.040 - Definitions.](#4341040---definitions)
* [43.41.050 - Office of financial management created—Transfer of powers, duties, and functions.](#4341050---office-of-financial-management-createdtransfer-of-powers-duties-and-functions)
* [43.41.060 - Director—Appointment—Salary—Vacancy—Delegation of powers and duties.](#4341060---directorappointmentsalaryvacancydelegation-of-powers-and-duties)
* [43.41.070 - Personnel.](#4341070---personnel)
* [43.41.080 - Deputy and assistant directors.](#4341080---deputy-and-assistant-directors)
* [43.41.100 - Director's powers and duties.](#4341100---directors-powers-and-duties)
* [43.41.102 - Director—Contract for collection and tabulation of census block statistics.](#4341102---directorcontract-for-collection-and-tabulation-of-census-block-statistics)
* [43.41.104 - Settlement and payment of accounts—Duty to require.](#4341104---settlement-and-payment-of-accountsduty-to-require)
* [43.41.106 - Settlement and payment of accounts—Authority to require testimony and evidence.](#4341106---settlement-and-payment-of-accountsauthority-to-require-testimony-and-evidence)
* [43.41.109 - "Undue hardship"—Defined by rule.](#4341109---undue-hardshipdefined-by-rule)
* [43.41.110 - Powers and duties of office of financial management.](#4341110---powers-and-duties-of-office-of-financial-management)
* [43.41.113 - Personnel policy and application of civil service laws.](#4341113---personnel-policy-and-application-of-civil-service-laws)
* [43.41.120 - Advisory or coordinating councils.](#4341120---advisory-or-coordinating-councils)
* [43.41.160 - State health care cost containment policies.](#4341160---state-health-care-cost-containment-policies)
* [43.41.170 - Budgeting process—Agencies implementing energy conservation to retain cost savings.](#4341170---budgeting-processagencies-implementing-energy-conservation-to-retain-cost-savings)
* [43.41.180 - Electronic funds and information transfer—State agency use.](#4341180---electronic-funds-and-information-transferstate-agency-use)
* [43.41.260 - Monitoring enrollee level in basic health plan and medicaid caseload of children—Funding levels adjustment.](#4341260---monitoring-enrollee-level-in-basic-health-plan-and-medicaid-caseload-of-childrenfunding-levels-adjustment)
* [43.41.270 - Natural resource-related and environmentally based grant and loan programs—Administration and monitoring assistance.](#4341270---natural-resource-related-and-environmentally-based-grant-and-loan-programsadministration-and-monitoring-assistance)
* [43.41.275 - State agency employment—Disability employment—Reporting requirements.](#4341275---state-agency-employmentdisability-employmentreporting-requirements)
* [43.41.391 - K-20 network—Duty to govern and oversee technical design, implementation, and operation.](#4341391---k-20-networkduty-to-govern-and-oversee-technical-design-implementation-and-operation)
* [43.41.392 - K-20 operations cooperative—Maintained by office.](#4341392---k-20-operations-cooperativemaintained-by-office)
* [43.41.393 - Technical plan of the K-20 telecommunications system and ongoing system enhancements—Contents.](#4341393---technical-plan-of-the-k-20-telecommunications-system-and-ongoing-system-enhancementscontents)
* [43.41.394 - Oversight of technical aspects of K-20 network.](#4341394---oversight-of-technical-aspects-of-k-20-network)
* [43.41.399 - Education technology revolving fund.](#4341399---education-technology-revolving-fund)
* [43.41.400 - Education data center.](#4341400---education-data-center)
* [43.41.405 - K-12 data—Securing federal funds.](#4341405---k-12-datasecuring-federal-funds)
* [43.41.410 - State support for students at institutions of higher education—Information.](#4341410---state-support-for-students-at-institutions-of-higher-educationinformation)
* [43.41.415 - Development of methods and protocols for measuring educational costs—Reports.](#4341415---development-of-methods-and-protocols-for-measuring-educational-costsreports)
* [43.41.420 - Undergraduate and graduate educational costs—Reports to regents and trustees.](#4341420---undergraduate-and-graduate-educational-costsreports-to-regents-and-trustees)
* [43.41.430 - Information technology investment pool—Information technology projects—Reports.](#4341430---information-technology-investment-poolinformation-technology-projectsreports)
* [43.41.433 - Information technology investment revolving account.](#4341433---information-technology-investment-revolving-account)
* [43.41.435 - Enumeration data used for population estimates—Destruction.](#4341435---enumeration-data-used-for-population-estimatesdestruction)
* [43.41.440 - Statewide information technology system development revolving account—Contracts for enterprise information technology systems—"Enterprise information technology system" defined.](#4341440---statewide-information-technology-system-development-revolving-accountcontracts-for-enterprise-information-technology-systemsenterprise-information-technology-system-defined)
* [43.41.442 - Statewide information technology system maintenance and operations revolving account—Contracts for administration, maintenance, and operations of enterprise information technology systems.](#4341442---statewide-information-technology-system-maintenance-and-operations-revolving-accountcontracts-for-administration-maintenance-and-operations-of-enterprise-information-technology-systems)
* [43.41.444 - Shared information technology system revolving account—Contracts for administration, development, maintenance, and operations of shared information technology systems—"Shared information technology system" defined.](#4341444---shared-information-technology-system-revolving-accountcontracts-for-administration-development-maintenance-and-operations-of-shared-information-technology-systemsshared-information-technology-system-defined)
* [43.41.450 - Office of financial management central service account.](#4341450---office-of-financial-management-central-service-account)
* [43.41.455 - State agency office relocation pool account.](#4341455---state-agency-office-relocation-pool-account)
* [43.41.460 - Military recruitment program for veterans—Development—Report.](#4341460---military-recruitment-program-for-veteransdevelopmentreport)
* [43.41.970 - Federal requirements for receipt of federal funds.](#4341970---federal-requirements-for-receipt-of-federal-funds)
## 43.41.030 - Purpose.
The legislature finds that the need for long-range state program planning and for the short-range planning carried on through the budget process, complement each other. The biennial budget submitted to the legislature must be considered in the light of the longer-range plans and goals of the state. The effectiveness of the short-range plan presented as budget proposals, cannot be measured without being aware of these longer-range goals. Thus efficient management requires that the planning and fiscal activities of state government be integrated into a unified process. It is the purpose of this chapter to bring these functions together in a new division of the office of the governor to be called the office of financial management.

\[ [1979 c 151 § 109](http://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1979c151.pdf?cite=1979%20c%20151%20§%20109); [1969 ex.s. c 239 § 1](http://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1969ex1c239.pdf?cite=1969%20ex.s.%20c%20239%20§%201); \]

## 43.41.040 - Definitions.
As used in this chapter, unless the context indicates otherwise:

1. "Office" means the office of financial management.

2. "Director" means the director of financial management.

3. "Agency" means and includes every state agency, office, officer, board, commission, department, state institution, or state institution of higher education, which includes all state universities, regional universities, The Evergreen State College, and community and technical colleges.

\[ [1993 c 500 § 4](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/1993-94/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/House/1528-S.SL.pdf?cite=1993%20c%20500%20§%204); [1979 c 151 § 110](http://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1979c151.pdf?cite=1979%20c%20151%20§%20110); [1969 ex.s. c 239 § 2](http://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1969ex1c239.pdf?cite=1969%20ex.s.%20c%20239%20§%202); \]

## 43.41.050 - Office of financial management created—Transfer of powers, duties, and functions.
There is created in the office of the governor, the office of financial management which shall be composed of the present central budget agency and the state planning, program management, and population and research divisions of the present *planning and community affairs agency. Any powers, duties and functions assigned to the central budget agency, or any state planning, program management, or population and research functions assigned to the present *planning and community affairs agency by the 1969 legislature, shall be transferred to the office of financial management.

\[ [1979 c 151 § 111](http://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1979c151.pdf?cite=1979%20c%20151%20§%20111); [1969 ex.s. c 239 § 3](http://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1969ex1c239.pdf?cite=1969%20ex.s.%20c%20239%20§%203); \]

## 43.41.060 - Director—Appointment—Salary—Vacancy—Delegation of powers and duties.
The executive head of the office of financial management shall be the director, who shall be appointed by the governor with the consent of the senate, and who shall serve at the pleasure of the governor. He or she shall be paid a salary to be fixed by the governor in accordance with the provisions of RCW 43.03.040. If a vacancy occurs in his or her position while the senate is not in session, the governor shall make a temporary appointment until the next meeting of the senate, when he or she shall present to that body his or her nomination for the office. The director may delegate such of his or her powers, duties and functions to other officers and employees of the department as he or she may deem necessary to the fulfillment of the purposes of this chapter.

\[ [2009 c 549 § 5118](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/2009-10/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/Senate/5038.SL.pdf?cite=2009%20c%20549%20§%205118); [1979 c 151 § 112](http://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1979c151.pdf?cite=1979%20c%20151%20§%20112); [1969 ex.s. c 239 § 4](http://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1969ex1c239.pdf?cite=1969%20ex.s.%20c%20239%20§%204); \]

## 43.41.070 - Personnel.
The director shall have the power to employ such personnel as may be necessary for the general administration of the office: PROVIDED, That, except as elsewhere specified in this chapter, such employment is in accordance with the rules of the state civil service law, chapter 41.06 RCW.

\[ [1969 ex.s. c 239 § 5](http://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1969ex1c239.pdf?cite=1969%20ex.s.%20c%20239%20§%205); \]

## 43.41.080 - Deputy and assistant directors.
The director may appoint such deputy directors and assistant directors as shall be needed to administer the office of financial management. The officers appointed under this section and exempt from the provisions of the state civil service law by the terms of RCW 41.06.075, shall be paid salaries to be fixed by the governor in accordance with the procedure established by law for the fixing of salaries for officers exempt from the operation of the state civil service law.

\[ [1979 c 151 § 113](http://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1979c151.pdf?cite=1979%20c%20151%20§%20113); [1969 ex.s. c 239 § 6](http://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1969ex1c239.pdf?cite=1969%20ex.s.%20c%20239%20§%206); \]

## 43.41.100 - Director's powers and duties.
The director of financial management shall:

1. Supervise and administer the activities of the office of financial management.

2. Exercise all the powers and perform all the duties prescribed by law with respect to the administration of the state budget and accounting system.

3. Advise the governor and the legislature with respect to matters affecting program management and planning.

4. Make efficiency surveys of all state departments and institutions, and the administrative and business methods pursued therein, examine into the physical needs and industrial activities thereof, and make confidential reports to the governor, recommending necessary betterments, repairs, and the installation of improved and more economical administrative methods, and advising such action as will result in a greater measure of self-support and remedies for inefficient functioning.

The director may enter into contracts on behalf of the state to carry out the purposes of this chapter; he or she may act for the state in the initiation of or participation in any multi-governmental agency program relative to the purposes of this chapter; and he or she may accept gifts and grants, whether such grants be of federal or other funds.

\[ [2009 c 549 § 5119](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/2009-10/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/Senate/5038.SL.pdf?cite=2009%20c%20549%20§%205119); [1979 c 151 § 114](http://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1979c151.pdf?cite=1979%20c%20151%20§%20114); [1969 ex.s. c 239 § 8](http://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1969ex1c239.pdf?cite=1969%20ex.s.%20c%20239%20§%208); \]

## 43.41.102 - Director—Contract for collection and tabulation of census block statistics.
Subject to a specific appropriation for that purpose, the director of financial management is hereby authorized and directed to contract with the United States bureau of census for collection and tabulation of block statistics in any or all cities and towns.

\[ [1979 c 151 § 115](http://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1979c151.pdf?cite=1979%20c%20151%20§%20115); [1977 ex.s. c 128 § 5](http://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1977ex1c128.pdf?cite=1977%20ex.s.%20c%20128%20§%205); \]

## 43.41.104 - Settlement and payment of accounts—Duty to require.
Upon receipt of information from the state auditor as provided in *RCW 43.09.050(5) as now or hereafter amended, the director of financial management shall require all persons who have received any moneys belonging to the state and have not accounted therefor, to settle their accounts and make payment thereof.

\[ [1979 c 151 § 116](http://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1979c151.pdf?cite=1979%20c%20151%20§%20116); [1977 ex.s. c 144 § 10](http://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1977ex1c144.pdf?cite=1977%20ex.s.%20c%20144%20§%2010); \]

## 43.41.106 - Settlement and payment of accounts—Authority to require testimony and evidence.
The director of financial management may, in his or her discretion, require any person presenting an account for settlement to be sworn before him or her, and to answer, orally or in writing, as to any facts relating to it.

\[ [2009 c 549 § 5120](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/2009-10/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/Senate/5038.SL.pdf?cite=2009%20c%20549%20§%205120); [1979 c 151 § 117](http://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1979c151.pdf?cite=1979%20c%20151%20§%20117); [1977 ex.s. c 144 § 11](http://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1977ex1c144.pdf?cite=1977%20ex.s.%20c%20144%20§%2011); \]

## 43.41.109 - "Undue hardship"—Defined by rule.
The director of the office of financial management shall by rule establish a definition of "undue hardship" for the purposes of RCW 1.16.050.

\[ [2014 c 168 § 2](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/2013-14/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/Senate/5173-S.SL.pdf?cite=2014%20c%20168%20§%202); \]

## 43.41.110 - Powers and duties of office of financial management.
The office of financial management shall:

1. Provide technical assistance to the governor and the legislature in identifying needs and in planning to meet those needs through state programs and a plan for expenditures.

2. Perform the comprehensive planning functions and processes necessary or advisable for state program planning and development, preparation of the budget, inter-departmental and inter-governmental coordination and cooperation, and determination of state capital improvement requirements.

3. Provide assistance and coordination to state agencies and departments in their preparation of plans and programs.

4. Provide general coordination and review of plans in functional areas of state government as may be necessary for receipt of federal or state funds.

5. Participate with other states or subdivisions thereof in interstate planning.

6. Encourage educational and research programs that further planning and provide administrative and technical services therefor.

7. Carry out the provisions of RCW 43.62.010 through 43.62.050 relating to the state census.

8. Be the official state participant in the federal-state cooperative program for local population estimates and as such certify all city and county special censuses to be considered in the allocation of state and federal revenues.

9. Be the official state center for processing and dissemination of federal decennial or quinquennial census data in cooperation with other state agencies.

10. Be the official state agency certifying annexations, incorporations, or disincorporations to the United States bureau of the census.

11. Review all United States bureau of the census population estimates used for federal revenue sharing purposes and provide a liaison for local governments with the United States bureau of the census in adjusting or correcting revenue sharing population estimates.

12. Provide fiscal notes depicting the expected fiscal impact of proposed legislation in accordance with chapter 43.88A RCW.

13. Be the official state agency to estimate and manage the cash flow of all public funds as provided in chapter 43.88 RCW. To this end, the office shall adopt such rules as are necessary to manage the cash flow of public funds.

\[ [2011 1st sp.s. c 43 § 510](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/2011-12/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/Senate/5931-S.SL.pdf?cite=2011%201st%20sp.s.%20c%2043%20§%20510); [2002 c 332 § 23](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/2001-02/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/House/2352.SL.pdf?cite=2002%20c%20332%20§%2023); [1981 2nd ex.s. c 4 § 13](http://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1981ex2c4.pdf?cite=1981%202nd%20ex.s.%20c%204%20§%2013); [1979 c 10 § 3](http://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1979c10.pdf?cite=1979%20c%2010%20§%203); [1977 ex.s. c 110 § 4](http://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1977ex1c110.pdf?cite=1977%20ex.s.%20c%20110%20§%204); [1977 ex.s. c 25 § 6](http://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1977ex1c25.pdf?cite=1977%20ex.s.%20c%2025%20§%206); [1969 ex.s. c 239 § 11](http://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1969ex1c239.pdf?cite=1969%20ex.s.%20c%20239%20§%2011); \]

## 43.41.113 - Personnel policy and application of civil service laws.
1. The office of financial management shall direct and supervise the personnel policy and application of the civil service laws, chapter 41.06 RCW.

2. The director or the director's designee has the authority and shall perform the functions as prescribed in chapter 41.06 RCW, or as otherwise prescribed by law.

3. The director may delegate to any agency the authority to perform administrative and technical personnel activities if the agency requests such authority and the director is satisfied that the agency has the personnel management capabilities to effectively perform the delegated activities. The director shall prescribe standards and guidelines for the performance of delegated activities. If the director determines that an agency is not performing delegated activities within the prescribed standards and guidelines, the director shall withdraw the authority from the agency to perform such activities.

\[ [2015 3rd sp.s. c 1 § 321](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/2015-16/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/Senate/5315-S2.SL.pdf?cite=2015%203rd%20sp.s.%20c%201%20§%20321); [2011 1st sp.s. c 43 § 430](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/2011-12/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/Senate/5931-S.SL.pdf?cite=2011%201st%20sp.s.%20c%2043%20§%20430); \]

## 43.41.120 - Advisory or coordinating councils.
The director or the governor may establish such additional advisory or coordinating councils as may be necessary to carry out the purposes of this chapter. Members of such councils shall serve at the pleasure of the governor. They shall receive no compensation for their services, but shall be reimbursed for travel expenses while engaged in business of the councils in accordance with RCW 43.03.050 and 43.03.060 as now existing or hereafter amended.

\[ 1975-'76 2nd ex.s. c 34 § 114; [1969 ex.s. c 239 § 12](http://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1969ex1c239.pdf?cite=1969%20ex.s.%20c%20239%20§%2012); \]

## 43.41.160 - State health care cost containment policies.
1. It is the purpose of this section to ensure implementation and coordination of chapter 70.14 RCW as well as other legislative and executive policies designed to contain the cost of health care that is purchased or provided by the state. In order to achieve that purpose, the director may:

    a.  Establish within the health care authority a health care cost containment program in cooperation with all state agencies;

    b.  Implement lawful health care cost containment policies that have been adopted by the legislature or the governor, including appropriation provisos;

    c.  Coordinate the activities of all state agencies with respect to health care cost containment policies;

    d.  Study and make recommendations on health care cost containment policies;

    e.  Monitor and report on the implementation of health care cost containment policies;

    f.  Appoint a health care cost containment technical advisory committee that represents state agencies that are involved in the direct purchase, funding, or provision of health care; and

    g.  Engage in other activities necessary to achieve the purposes of this section.

2. All state agencies shall cooperate with the director in carrying out the purpose of this section.

\[ [2011 1st sp.s. c 15 § 70](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/2011-12/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/House/1738-S2.SL.pdf?cite=2011%201st%20sp.s.%20c%2015%20§%2070); [1986 c 303 § 11](http://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1986c303.pdf?cite=1986%20c%20303%20§%2011); \]

## 43.41.170 - Budgeting process—Agencies implementing energy conservation to retain cost savings.
The office of financial management shall ensure that to the extent possible the budget process shall allow state agencies implementing energy conservation to retain the resulting cost savings for other purposes, including further energy conservation.

\[ [1989 c 11 § 15](http://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1989c11.pdf?cite=1989%20c%2011%20§%2015); [1986 c 325 § 3](http://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1986c325.pdf?cite=1986%20c%20325%20§%203); \]

## 43.41.180 - Electronic funds and information transfer—State agency use.
1. The office of financial management is authorized to approve the use of electronic and other technological means to transfer both funds and information whenever economically feasible, to eliminate paper documentation wherever possible, and to provide greater fiscal responsibility. This authorization includes but is not limited to the authority to approve use of electronic means to transfer payroll, vendor payments, and benefit payments and acceptance of credit cards, debit cards, and other consumer debt instruments for payment of taxes, licenses, and fees. The office of financial management shall adopt rules under RCW 43.41.110(13) to specify the manner in which electronic and other technological means, including credit cards, are available to state agencies.

2. No state agency may use electronic or other technological means, including credit cards, without specific continuing authorization from the office of financial management.

\[ [1993 c 500 § 2](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/1993-94/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/House/1528-S.SL.pdf?cite=1993%20c%20500%20§%202); \]

## 43.41.260 - Monitoring enrollee level in basic health plan and medicaid caseload of children—Funding levels adjustment.
The health care authority and the office of financial management shall together monitor the enrollee level in the basic health plan and the medicaid caseload of children. The office of financial management shall adjust the funding levels by interagency reimbursement of funds between the basic health plan and medicaid and adjust the funding levels for the health care authority to maximize combined enrollment.

\[ [2011 1st sp.s. c 15 § 71](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/2011-12/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/House/1738-S2.SL.pdf?cite=2011%201st%20sp.s.%20c%2015%20§%2071); [2009 c 479 § 28](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/2009-10/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/Senate/5073-S.SL.pdf?cite=2009%20c%20479%20§%2028); [1995 c 265 § 21](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/1995-96/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/House/1046-S.SL.pdf?cite=1995%20c%20265%20§%2021); \]

## 43.41.270 - Natural resource-related and environmentally based grant and loan programs—Administration and monitoring assistance.
1. The office of financial management shall assist natural resource-related agencies in developing outcome-focused performance measures for administering natural resource-related and environmentally based grant and loan programs. These performance measures are to be used in determining grant eligibility, for program management and performance assessment.

2. The office of financial management and the recreation and conservation office shall assist natural resource-related agencies in developing recommendations for a monitoring program to measure outcome-focused performance measures required by this section. The recommendations must be consistent with the framework and coordinated monitoring strategy developed by the monitoring oversight committee established in *RCW 77.85.210.

3. Natural resource agencies shall consult with grant or loan recipients including local governments, tribes, nongovernmental organizations, and other interested parties, and report to the office of financial management on the implementation of this section.

4. For purposes of this section, "natural resource-related agencies" include the department of ecology, the department of natural resources, the department of fish and wildlife, the state conservation commission, the recreation and conservation funding board, the salmon recovery funding board, and the public works board within the department of commerce.

5. For purposes of this section, "natural resource-related environmentally based grant and loan programs" includes the conservation reserve enhancement program; dairy nutrient management grants under chapter 90.64 RCW; state conservation commission water quality grants under chapter 89.08 RCW; coordinated prevention grants, public participation grants, and remedial action grants under RCW 70A.305.190; water pollution control facilities financing under chapter 70A.135 RCW; aquatic lands enhancement grants under RCW 79.105.150; habitat grants under the Washington wildlife and recreation program under RCW 79A.15.040; salmon recovery grants under chapter 77.85 RCW; and the public works trust fund program under chapter 43.155 RCW. The term also includes programs administered by the department of fish and wildlife related to protection or recovery of fish stocks which are funded with moneys from the capital budget.

\[ [2020 c 20 § 1050](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/2019-20/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/House/2246-S.SL.pdf?cite=2020%20c%2020%20§%201050); [2009 c 345 § 12](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/2009-10/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/House/2157-S.SL.pdf?cite=2009%20c%20345%20§%2012); [2007 c 444 § 7](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/2007-08/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/Senate/5224-S.SL.pdf?cite=2007%20c%20444%20§%207); [2007 c 241 § 5](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/2007-08/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/House/1813.SL.pdf?cite=2007%20c%20241%20§%205); [2001 c 227 § 2](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/2001-02/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/House/1785-S.SL.pdf?cite=2001%20c%20227%20§%202); \]

## 43.41.275 - State agency employment—Disability employment—Reporting requirements.
1. By January 31st of each year, state agencies employing one hundred or more people must submit the report described in subsection (2) of this section to the human resources director, with copies to the director of the department of social and health services' division of vocational rehabilitation and the governor's disability employment task force.

2. The report must include the following information:

    a.  The number of employees from the previous calendar year;

    b.  The number of employees classified as individuals with disabilities;

    c.  The number of employees that separated from the state agency the previous year;

    d.  The number of employees that were hired by the state agency the previous year;

    e.  The number of employees hired from the division of vocational rehabilitation services and from the department of the services for the blind the previous year;

    f.  The number of planned hires for the current year; and

    g.  Opportunities for internships for the department of social and health services' division of vocational rehabilitation and developmental disabilities administration, and the department of the services for the blind client placement, leading to an entry-level position placement upon successful completion for the current year.

\[ [2015 c 204 § 3](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/2015-16/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/House/1636-S.SL.pdf?cite=2015%20c%20204%20§%203); \]

## 43.41.391 - K-20 network—Duty to govern and oversee technical design, implementation, and operation.
1. The office has the duty to govern and oversee the technical design, implementation, and operation of the K-20 network including, but not limited to, the following duties: Establishment and implementation of K-20 network technical policy, including technical standards and conditions of use; review and approval of network design; and resolving user/provider disputes.

2. The office has the following powers and duties:

    a.  In cooperation with the educational sectors and other interested parties, to establish goals and measurable objectives for the network;

    b.  To ensure that the goals and measurable objectives of the network are the basis for any decisions or recommendations regarding the technical development and operation of the network;

    c.  To adopt, modify, and implement policies to facilitate network development, operation, and expansion. Such policies may include but need not be limited to the following issues: Quality of educational services; access to the network by recognized organizations and accredited institutions that deliver educational programming, including public libraries; prioritization of programming within limited resources; prioritization of access to the system and the sharing of technological advances; network security; identification and evaluation of emerging technologies for delivery of educational programs; future expansion or redirection of the system; network fee structures; and costs for the development and operation of the network;

    d.  To prepare and submit to the governor and the legislature a coordinated budget for network development, operation, and expansion. The budget shall include the director of the consolidated technology services agency's recommendations on (i) any state funding requested for network transport and equipment, distance education facilities and hardware or software specific to the use of the network, and proposed new network end sites, (ii) annual copayments to be charged to public educational sector institutions and other public entities connected to the network, and (iii) charges to nongovernmental entities connected to the network;

    e.  To adopt and monitor the implementation of a methodology to evaluate the effectiveness of the network in achieving the educational goals and measurable objectives;

    f.  To establish by rule acceptable use policies governing user eligibility for participation in the K-20 network, acceptable uses of network resources, and procedures for enforcement of such policies. The office shall set forth appropriate procedures for enforcement of acceptable use policies, that may include suspension of network connections and removal of shared equipment for violations of network conditions or policies. The office shall have sole responsibility for the implementation of enforcement procedures relating to technical conditions of use.

\[ [2015 3rd sp.s. c 1 § 214](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/2015-16/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/Senate/5315-S2.SL.pdf?cite=2015%203rd%20sp.s.%20c%201%20§%20214); [2011 1st sp.s. c 43 § 718](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/2011-12/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/Senate/5931-S.SL.pdf?cite=2011%201st%20sp.s.%20c%2043%20§%20718); \]

## 43.41.392 - K-20 operations cooperative—Maintained by office.
The office shall maintain, in consultation with the K-20 network users, the K-20 operations cooperative, which shall be responsible for day-to-day network management, technical network status monitoring, technical problem response coordination, and other duties as agreed to by the office and the educational sectors. Funding for the K-20 operations cooperative shall be provided from the education technology revolving fund under *RCW 43.41A.105.

\[ [2011 1st sp.s. c 43 § 719](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/2011-12/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/Senate/5931-S.SL.pdf?cite=2011%201st%20sp.s.%20c%2043%20§%20719); \]

## 43.41.393 - Technical plan of the K-20 telecommunications system and ongoing system enhancements—Contents.
The office, in conjunction with the K-20 network users, shall maintain a technical plan of the K-20 telecommunications system and ongoing system enhancements. The office shall ensure that the technical plan adheres to the goals and objectives established under RCW 43.105.054. The technical plan shall provide for:

1. A telecommunications backbone connecting educational service districts, the main campuses of public baccalaureate institutions, all of the campuses of public research institutions, and the main campuses of community colleges and technical colleges.

2. [Empty]

    a.  Connection to the K-20 network by entities that include, but need not be limited to: School districts, public higher education off-campus and extension centers, and campuses of community colleges and technical colleges, as prioritized by the chief information officer; (b) distance education facilities and components for entities listed in this subsection and subsection (1) of this section; and (c) connection for independent nonprofit institutions of higher education, provided that:

        i.  The office and each independent nonprofit institution of higher education to be connected agree in writing to terms and conditions of connectivity. The terms and conditions shall ensure, among other things, that the provision of K-20 services does not violate Article VIII, section 5 of the state Constitution and that the institution shall adhere to K-20 network policies; and

        ii.  The office determines that inclusion of the independent nonprofit institutions of higher education will not significantly affect the network's eligibility for federal universal service fund discounts or subsidies.

3. Subsequent phases may include, but need not be limited to, connections to public libraries, state and local governments, community resource centers, and the private sector.

\[ [2017 c 52 § 14](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/2017-18/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/House/1107.SL.pdf?cite=2017%20c%2052%20§%2014); [2015 3rd sp.s. c 1 § 215](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/2015-16/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/Senate/5315-S2.SL.pdf?cite=2015%203rd%20sp.s.%20c%201%20§%20215); [2011 1st sp.s. c 43 § 720](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/2011-12/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/Senate/5931-S.SL.pdf?cite=2011%201st%20sp.s.%20c%2043%20§%20720); \]

## 43.41.394 - Oversight of technical aspects of K-20 network.
1. In overseeing the technical aspects of the K-20 network, the office is not intended to duplicate the statutory responsibilities of the student achievement council, the superintendent of public instruction, the state librarian, or the governing boards of the institutions of higher education.

2. The office may not interfere in any curriculum or legally offered programming offered over the K-20 network.

3. The responsibility to review and approve standards and common specifications for the K-20 network remains the responsibility of the office under *RCW 43.41A.025.

4. The coordination of telecommunications planning for the common schools remains the responsibility of the superintendent of public instruction. Except as set forth in *RCW 43.41A.025(2)(f), the office may recommend, but not require, revisions to the superintendent's telecommunications plans.

\[ [2012 c 229 § 586](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/2011-12/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/House/2483-S2.SL.pdf?cite=2012%20c%20229%20§%20586); [2011 1st sp.s. c 43 § 721](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/2011-12/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/Senate/5931-S.SL.pdf?cite=2011%201st%20sp.s.%20c%2043%20§%20721); \]

## 43.41.399 - Education technology revolving fund.
1. The education technology revolving fund is created in the custody of the state treasurer. All receipts from billings under subsection (2) of this section must be deposited in the revolving fund. Only the director or the director's designee may authorize expenditures from the fund. The revolving fund shall be used to pay for K-20 network operations, transport, equipment, software, supplies, and services, maintenance and depreciation of on-site data, and shared infrastructure, and other costs incidental to the development, operation, and administration of shared educational information technology services, telecommunications, and systems. The revolving fund shall not be used for the acquisition, maintenance, or operations of local telecommunications infrastructure or the maintenance or depreciation of on-premises video equipment specific to a particular institution or group of institutions.

2. The revolving fund and all disbursements from the revolving fund are subject to the allotment procedure under chapter 43.88 RCW, but an appropriation is not required for expenditures. The office shall, subject to the review and approval of the office of financial management, establish and implement a billing structure for network services identified in subsection (1) of this section.

3. The office shall charge those public entities connected to the K-20 telecommunications system under RCW 43.41.393 an annual copayment per unit of transport connection as determined by the legislature after consideration of the board's recommendations. This copayment shall be deposited into the revolving fund to be used for the purposes in subsection (1) of this section. It is the intent of the legislature to appropriate to the revolving fund such moneys as necessary to cover the costs for transport, maintenance, and depreciation of data equipment located at the individual public institutions, maintenance and depreciation of the K-20 network backbone, and services provided to the network under RCW 43.41.391.

\[ [2015 3rd sp.s. c 1 § 216](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/2015-16/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/Senate/5315-S2.SL.pdf?cite=2015%203rd%20sp.s.%20c%201%20§%20216); [2011 1st sp.s. c 43 § 722](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/2011-12/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/Senate/5931-S.SL.pdf?cite=2011%201st%20sp.s.%20c%2043%20§%20722); [2004 c 276 § 910](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/2003-04/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/House/2459-S.SL.pdf?cite=2004%20c%20276%20§%20910); [1999 c 285 § 10](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/1999-00/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/Senate/5789.SL.pdf?cite=1999%20c%20285%20§%2010); [1997 c 180 § 1](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/1997-98/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/Senate/6004.SL.pdf?cite=1997%20c%20180%20§%201); \]

## 43.41.400 - Education data center.
1. An education data center shall be established in the office of financial management. The education data center shall jointly, with the legislative evaluation and accountability program committee, conduct collaborative analyses of early learning, K-12, and higher education programs and education issues across the P-20 system, which includes the department of children, youth, and families, the superintendent of public instruction, the professional educator standards board, the state board of education, the state board for community and technical colleges, the workforce training and education coordinating board, the student achievement council, public and private nonprofit four-year institutions of higher education, and the employment security department. The education data center shall conduct collaborative analyses under this section with the legislative evaluation and accountability program committee and provide data electronically to the legislative evaluation and accountability program committee, to the extent permitted by state and federal confidentiality requirements. The education data center shall be considered an authorized representative of the state educational agencies in this section under applicable federal and state statutes for purposes of accessing and compiling student record data for research purposes.

2. The education data center shall:

    a.  In consultation with the legislative evaluation and accountability program committee and the agencies and organizations participating in the education data center, identify the critical research and policy questions that are intended to be addressed by the education data center and the data needed to address the questions;

    b.  Coordinate with other state education agencies to compile and analyze education data, including data on student demographics that is disaggregated by distinct ethnic categories within racial subgroups, and complete P-20 research projects;

    c.  Collaborate with the legislative evaluation and accountability program committee and the education and fiscal committees of the legislature in identifying the data to be compiled and analyzed to ensure that legislative interests are served;

    d.  Annually provide to the K-12 data governance group a list of data elements and data quality improvements that are necessary to answer the research and policy questions identified by the education data center and have been identified by the legislative committees in (c) of this subsection. Within three months of receiving the list, the K-12 data governance group shall develop and transmit to the education data center a feasibility analysis of obtaining or improving the data, including the steps required, estimated time frame, and the financial and other resources that would be required. Based on the analysis, the education data center shall submit, if necessary, a recommendation to the legislature regarding any statutory changes or resources that would be needed to collect or improve the data;

    e.  Monitor and evaluate the education data collection systems of the organizations and agencies represented in the education data center ensuring that data systems are flexible, able to adapt to evolving needs for information, and to the extent feasible and necessary, include data that are needed to conduct the analyses and provide answers to the research and policy questions identified in (a) of this subsection;

    f.  Track enrollment and outcomes through the public centralized higher education enrollment system;

    g.  Assist other state educational agencies' collaborative efforts to develop a long-range enrollment plan for higher education including estimates to meet demographic and workforce needs;

    h.  Provide research that focuses on student transitions within and among the early learning, K-12, and higher education sectors in the P-20 system;

    i.  Prepare an annual report on the educational and workforce outcomes of youth in and released from institutional education facilities as defined in RCW 28A.190.005, using data disaggregated by age, and by ethnic categories and racial subgroups in accordance with RCW 28A.300.042. The annual report required by this subsection (2)(i) must be provided to the office of the superintendent of public instruction in a manner that is suitable for compliance with RCW 28A.190.110; and

    j.  Make recommendations to the legislature as necessary to help ensure the goals and objectives of this section and RCW 28A.655.210 and 28A.300.507 are met.

3. The department of children, youth, and families, superintendent of public instruction, professional educator standards board, state board of education, state board for community and technical colleges, workforce training and education coordinating board, student achievement council, public four-year institutions of higher education, department of social and health services, and employment security department shall work with the education data center to develop data-sharing and research agreements, consistent with applicable security and confidentiality requirements, to facilitate the work of the center. The education data center shall also develop data-sharing and research agreements with the administrative office of the courts to conduct research on educational and workforce outcomes using data maintained under RCW 13.50.010(12) related to juveniles. Private, nonprofit institutions of higher education that provide programs of education beyond the high school level leading at least to the baccalaureate degree and are accredited by the Northwest association of schools and colleges or their peer accreditation bodies may also develop data-sharing and research agreements with the education data center, consistent with applicable security and confidentiality requirements. The education data center shall make data from collaborative analyses available to the education agencies and institutions that contribute data to the education data center to the extent allowed by federal and state security and confidentiality requirements applicable to the data of each contributing agency or institution.

\[ [2021 c 164 § 15](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/2021-22/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/House/1295-S2.SL.pdf?cite=2021%20c%20164%20§%2015); [2017 3rd sp.s. c 6 § 223](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/2017-18/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/House/1661-S2.SL.pdf?cite=2017%203rd%20sp.s.%20c%206%20§%20223); [2016 c 72 § 108](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/2015-16/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/House/1541-S4.SL.pdf?cite=2016%20c%2072%20§%20108); [2012 c 229 § 585](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/2011-12/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/House/2483-S2.SL.pdf?cite=2012%20c%20229%20§%20585); [2009 c 548 § 201](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/2009-10/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/House/2261-S.SL.pdf?cite=2009%20c%20548%20§%20201); [2007 c 401 § 3](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/2007-08/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/Senate/5843-S2.SL.pdf?cite=2007%20c%20401%20§%203); \]

## 43.41.405 - K-12 data—Securing federal funds.
The education data center and the superintendent of public instruction shall take all actions necessary to secure federal funds to implement RCW 43.41.400, 28A.655.210, and 28A.300.507.

\[ [2009 c 548 § 204](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/2009-10/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/House/2261-S.SL.pdf?cite=2009%20c%20548%20§%20204); \]

## 43.41.410 - State support for students at institutions of higher education—Information.
The education data center in consultation with institutions of higher education as defined in RCW 28B.10.016 shall annually develop information on the approximate amount of state support that students receive. For students at state-supported colleges and universities, the information must include the approximate level of support received by students in each tuition category. That information may include consideration of the following: Expenditures included in the educational cost formula; revenue forgiven from waived tuition and fees; state-funded financial aid awarded to students at public institutions; and all or a portion of appropriated amounts not reflected in the educational cost formula for institutional programs and services that may affect or enhance the educational experience of students at a particular institution. For students attending a private college, university, or proprietary school, the information shall include the amount of state-funded financial aid awarded to students attending the institution.

\[ [2012 c 229 § 301](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/2011-12/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/House/2483-S2.SL.pdf?cite=2012%20c%20229%20§%20301); \]

## 43.41.415 - Development of methods and protocols for measuring educational costs—Reports.
1. The education data center, in consultation with the house of representatives and senate committees responsible for higher education, the respective fiscal committees of the house of representatives and senate, the office of financial management, the state board for community and technical colleges, and the state institutions of higher education, shall develop standardized methods and protocols for measuring the undergraduate and graduate educational costs for the state universities, regional universities, and community colleges, including but not limited to the costs of instruction, costs to provide degrees in specific fields, and costs for precollege remediation.

2. The institutions of higher education shall participate in the development of cost study methods and shall provide all necessary data in a timely fashion consistent with the protocols developed.

3. Beginning December 1, 2012, and each December 1st thereafter, the center must provide cost study reports intended to meet the information needs of the governor's office and the legislature and the requirements of RCW 43.41.410.

\[ [2012 c 229 § 303](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/2011-12/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/House/2483-S2.SL.pdf?cite=2012%20c%20229%20§%20303); [2011 1st sp.s. c 11 § 105](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/2011-12/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/Senate/5182-S2.SL.pdf?cite=2011%201st%20sp.s.%20c%2011%20§%20105); [2004 c 275 § 15](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/2003-04/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/House/3103-S.SL.pdf?cite=2004%20c%20275%20§%2015); [1995 1st sp.s. c 9 § 7](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/1995-96/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/Senate/5325-S.SL.pdf?cite=1995%201st%20sp.s.%20c%209%20§%207); [1992 c 231 § 5](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/1991-92/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/Senate/6285.SL.pdf?cite=1992%20c%20231%20§%205); [1989 c 245 § 3](http://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1989c245.pdf?cite=1989%20c%20245%20§%203); [1985 c 390 § 16](http://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1985c390.pdf?cite=1985%20c%20390%20§%2016); [1985 c 370 § 65](http://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1985c370.pdf?cite=1985%20c%20370%20§%2065); [1982 1st ex.s. c 37 § 16](http://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1982ex1c37.pdf?cite=1982%201st%20ex.s.%20c%2037%20§%2016); [1981 c 257 § 3](http://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1981c257.pdf?cite=1981%20c%20257%20§%203); [1977 ex.s. c 322 § 7](http://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1977ex1c322.pdf?cite=1977%20ex.s.%20c%20322%20§%207); \]

## 43.41.420 - Undergraduate and graduate educational costs—Reports to regents and trustees.
The education data center must determine and report on amounts constituting undergraduate and graduate educational costs to the several boards of regents and trustees for the state institutions of higher education by November 10th of each even-numbered year.

\[ [2012 c 229 § 304](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/2011-12/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/House/2483-S2.SL.pdf?cite=2012%20c%20229%20§%20304); \]

## 43.41.430 - Information technology investment pool—Information technology projects—Reports.
1. Subject to funds appropriated for this specific purpose, the office of financial management may establish an information technology investment pool and may enter into financial contracts for the acquisition of information technology projects for state agencies. Information technology projects funded under this section must meet the following requirements:

    a.  The project begins or continues replacement of information technology systems with modern and more efficient information technology systems;

    b.  The project improves the ability of an agency to recover from major disaster; or

    c.  The project provides future savings and efficiencies for an agency through reduced operating costs, improved customer service, or increased revenue collections.

2. Preference for project approval under this section must be given to an agency that has prior project approval from the office of the chief information officer and an approved business plan, and the primary hurdle to project funding is the lack of funding capacity.

3. The office of financial management with assistance from the office of the chief information officer shall report to the governor and the fiscal committees of the legislature by November 1st of each year on the status of distributions and expenditures on information technology projects and improved statewide or agency performance results achieved by project funding.

\[ [2013 2nd sp.s. c 33 § 5](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/2013-14/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/Senate/5891-S.SL.pdf?cite=2013%202nd%20sp.s.%20c%2033%20§%205); \]

## 43.41.433 - Information technology investment revolving account.
1. The information technology investment revolving account is created in the custody of the state treasurer. All receipts from legislative appropriations and transfers must be deposited into the account. Only the director of financial management or the director's designee may authorize expenditures from the account. The account is subject to allotment procedures under chapter 43.88 RCW, but an appropriation is not required for expenditures.

2. Any residual balance of funds remaining in the information technology investment revolving account created in section 705, chapter 4, Laws of 2015 3rd sp. sess. and reenacted in subsection (1) of this section shall be transferred to the information technology investment revolving account created in subsection (1) of this section after June 30, 2017.

\[ [2018 c 299 § 901](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/2017-18/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/Senate/6032-S.SL.pdf?cite=2018%20c%20299%20§%20901); [2017 3rd sp.s. c 1 § 950](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/2017-18/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/Senate/5883-S.SL.pdf?cite=2017%203rd%20sp.s.%20c%201%20§%20950); \]

## 43.41.435 - Enumeration data used for population estimates—Destruction.
The office must destroy enumeration data collected under RCW 35.13.260, 35A.14.700, 36.13.030, and chapter 43.62 RCW after it is used to produce the required population estimates.

\[ [2014 c 14 § 2](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/2013-14/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/House/2515.SL.pdf?cite=2014%20c%2014%20§%202); \]

## 43.41.440 - Statewide information technology system development revolving account—Contracts for enterprise information technology systems—"Enterprise information technology system" defined.
1. The statewide information technology system development revolving account is created in the custody of the state treasurer. All receipts from legislative appropriations and assessments to agencies for the development and acquisition of enterprise information technology systems must be deposited into the account. Moneys in the account may be spent only after appropriation. The account must be used solely for the development and acquisition of enterprise information technology systems that are consistent with the enterprise-based strategy established by the consolidated technology services agency in RCW 43.105.025. Expenditures from the account may not be used for maintenance and operations of enterprise information technology systems. The account may be used for the payment of salaries, wages, and other costs directly related to the development and acquisition of enterprise information technology systems.

2. All payment of principal and interest on debt issued for enterprise information technology systems must be paid from the account.

3. The office may contract for the development or acquisition of enterprise information technology systems.

4. For the purposes of this section and RCW 43.41.442, "enterprise information technology system" means an information technology system that serves agencies with a certain business need or process that are required to use the system unless the agency has received a waiver from the state chief information officer. "Enterprise information technology system" also includes projects that are of statewide significance including enterprise-level solutions, enterprise resource planning, and shared services initiatives.

\[ [2015 3rd sp.s. c 1 § 502](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/2015-16/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/Senate/5315-S2.SL.pdf?cite=2015%203rd%20sp.s.%20c%201%20§%20502); \]

## 43.41.442 - Statewide information technology system maintenance and operations revolving account—Contracts for administration, maintenance, and operations of enterprise information technology systems.
1. The statewide information technology system maintenance and operations revolving account is created in the custody of the state treasurer. All receipts from fees, charges for services, and assessments to agencies for the maintenance and operations of enterprise information technology systems must be deposited into the account. The account must be used solely for the maintenance and operations of enterprise information technology systems.

2. Only the director or the director's designee may authorize expenditures from the account. The account is subject to allotment procedures under chapter 43.88 RCW, but no appropriation is required for expenditure.

3. The office may contract with the consolidated technology services agency for the billing of fees, charges for services, and assessments to agencies, and for the maintenance and operations of enterprise information technology systems.

4. "Enterprise information technology system" has the definition in RCW 43.41.440.

\[ [2015 3rd sp.s. c 1 § 503](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/2015-16/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/Senate/5315-S2.SL.pdf?cite=2015%203rd%20sp.s.%20c%201%20§%20503); \]

## 43.41.444 - Shared information technology system revolving account—Contracts for administration, development, maintenance, and operations of shared information technology systems—"Shared information technology system" defined.
1. The shared information technology system revolving account is created in the custody of the state treasurer. All receipts from fees, charges for services, and assessments to agencies for shared information technology systems must be deposited into the account.

2. Only the director or the director's designee may authorize expenditures from the account. The account is subject to allotment procedures under chapter 43.88 RCW, but no appropriation is required for expenditure.

3. The office may contract with the consolidated technology services agency for the billing of fees, charges for services, and assessments to agencies, and for the development, maintenance, and operations of shared information technology systems.

4. For the purposes of this section, "shared information technology system" means an information technology system that is available to, but not required for use by, agencies.

\[ [2015 3rd sp.s. c 1 § 504](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/2015-16/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/Senate/5315-S2.SL.pdf?cite=2015%203rd%20sp.s.%20c%201%20§%20504); \]

## 43.41.450 - Office of financial management central service account.
The office of financial management central service account is created in the state treasury. The account is to be used by the office as a revolving fund for the payment of salaries, wages, and other costs required for the operation and maintenance of statewide budgeting, accounting, forecasting, and functions and activities in the office. All receipts from agency fees and charges for services collected from public agencies must be deposited into the account. The director shall fix the terms and charges to agencies based on each agency's share of the office statewide cost allocation plan for federal funds. Moneys in the account may be spent only after appropriation. During the 2017-2019 fiscal biennium, the account may be used as a revolving fund for the payment of salaries, wages, and other costs related to policy activities in the office. The legislature intends to continue the use of the revolving fund for policy activities during the 2019-2021 biennium.

\[ [2017 3rd sp.s. c 1 § 968](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/2017-18/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/Senate/5883-S.SL.pdf?cite=2017%203rd%20sp.s.%20c%201%20§%20968); [2016 sp.s. c 36 § 927](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/2015-16/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/House/2376-S.SL.pdf?cite=2016%20sp.s.%20c%2036%20§%20927); \]

## 43.41.455 - State agency office relocation pool account.
The state agency office relocation pool account is created in the custody of the state treasurer. All receipts from legislative appropriations and transfers must be deposited in the account. Expenditures from the account may be used only for state agency costs related to relocation of state agency offices. Authorized expenditures include lease payments and costs of relocation, equipment, furniture, and tenant improvements. Only the director of the office of financial management or the director's designee may authorize expenditures from the account. The account is subject to allotment procedures under chapter 43.88 RCW, but an appropriation is not required for expenditures.

\[ [2017 3rd sp.s. c 1 § 949](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/2017-18/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/Senate/5883-S.SL.pdf?cite=2017%203rd%20sp.s.%20c%201%20§%20949); \]

## 43.41.460 - Military recruitment program for veterans—Development—Report.
1. The office shall develop a military recruitment program that targets veterans and gives them credit for their knowledge, skills, and leadership abilities. In developing the program, the office shall consult with the department of enterprise services, department of veteran[s] affairs, the state military transition council, the veterans employee resource group, and other interested stakeholders. Program development must include, but is not limited to, identifying: (a) Public and private military recruitment programs and ways those programs can be used in Washington; (b) similar military and state job classes and develop a system to provide veterans with experience credit for similar work; and (c) barriers to state employment and opportunities to better utilize veterans experience.

2. The office shall report to the legislature with a draft plan by January 1, 2018, that includes draft bill language if necessary.

\[ [2017 c 192 § 4](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/2017-18/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/Senate/5849.SL.pdf?cite=2017%20c%20192%20§%204); \]

## 43.41.970 - Federal requirements for receipt of federal funds.
If any part of this chapter is ruled to be in conflict with federal requirements which are a prescribed condition of the allocation of federal funds to the state, or to any departments or agencies thereof, such conflicting part of this chapter is declared to be inoperative solely to the extent of the conflict. No such ruling shall affect the operation of the remainder of this chapter. Any internal reorganization carried out under the terms of this chapter shall meet federal requirements which are a necessary condition to the receipt of federal funds by the state.

\[ [1969 ex.s. c 239 § 20](http://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1969ex1c239.pdf?cite=1969%20ex.s.%20c%20239%20§%2020); \]


## **43.41.XXX - TBD**
**
1. The medicaid expenditure forecast work group is hereby created. The work group shall be managed by the office of financial management.

2. The office shall employ:

    a. A forecast manager to oversee and manage forecast staff and supervise the preparation of all medicaid expenditure forecasts;

    b. A forecast lead to oversee and coordinate the forecast process; develop the infrastructure and programming for the forecast; and develop primary trends, federal medical assistance percentages, and steps necessary to develop the forecast; and

    c. Forecast analysts to develop infrastructure and programming for the forecast and develop primary trends, federal medical assistance percentages, and steps necessary to develop the forecast.

3. Members of the work group shall consist of:

    a. A senior budget manager for human services and budget analyst for medicaid from the office;

    b. A deputy chief financial officer, budget manager, medicaid rates section manager, managed care unit manager, and analytics staff from the health care authority;

    c. Senior fiscal analysts from the two fiscal committees of the legislature assigned to medicaid;

    d. An actuary from the office of the state actuary; and

    e. Other staff as deemed necessary by the work group.

4. To ensure the duties of the work group are carried out in a timely, transparent manner, the office shall develop a charter, in consultation with the members of the work group, that specifies:

    a. The purpose of the work group;

    b. Its intended customers;

    c. Detailed roles and responsibilities of each member of the work group;

    d. Protocols, such as the level of agreement necessary, to finalize a decision;

    e. Rules for settling a disagreement;

    f. How inquiries and requests for analysis are prioritized;

    g. How assumptions are documented and communicated to intended customers;

    h. How to compare prior forecasts against expenditures; and

    i. Quality assurance mechanisms.

5. The work group shall provide technical support to the governor's office and the fiscal committees of the legislature. To promote the free flow of information and to promote legislative and executive input in the development of assumptions and preparation of forecasts, immediate access to all information and statistical models relating to the forecast shall be available to the work group. Meetings of the work group may be called by any member of the group for the purpose of assisting the work group, reviewing forecasts, or for any other purpose that may assist the group.

6. Members from the health care authority shall provide all data, documents, information, and responses to the work group necessary to develop the forecast in the time frames agreed upon by the work group.

7. All members shall review information necessary to develop the forecast in the time frames agreed upon by the work group.

8. In consultation with the work group and subject to the approval of the work group, the forecast manager shall prepare:

    a. An official forecast; and

    b. Other forecasts based on alternative assumptions as the work group may determine.

9. The forecast manager shall submit official forecasts and any unofficial forecasts prepared under this section to the office and the staff of appropriate fiscal committees of the legislature. The forecasts shall be submitted at least twice each year and on such dates as the work group determines will facilitate the development of budget proposals by the governor and the legislature.

10. The forecasts shall be used to develop budget estimates for the office and the fiscal committees of the legislature. The official forecast prepared under this section shall be the basis of the governor's budget document and utilized by the legislature in the development of the omnibus biennial appropriations act.

11. The health care authority shall:

    a. Provide to the forecast manager immediate access to all information relating to the forecast;

    b. Work with its contracted actuary and the work group to develop methods and metrics related to managed care program integrity activity that shall be incorporated into annual managed care rate setting. This activity shall be done during the normal course of rate setting with the work group and shall not be conducted separately from the work group;

    c. Work with the work group to ensure the results of program integrity activity are incorporated into the managed care rate setting process in a transparent, timely, measurable, quantifiable manner. This activity shall be done during the normal course of rate setting with the work group and shall not be conducted separately from the work group; and

    d. Submit reports and data to the work group as soon as the reports and data are available and shall provide to the work group and the forecast manager such additional raw, program-level data or information as may be necessary for discharge of their respective duties.

12. For purposes of this section:

    a. "Work group" means the medicaid expenditure forecast work group.

    b. "Forecast" means the medicaid expenditure forecast.


[ 2021 c XXX § 5; ]**
