# 29A.40 - Elections by mail.
* [29A.40.010 - Ballots by mail.](#29a40010---ballots-by-mail)
* [29A.40.020 - Request for ballot from an overseas voter or service voter.](#29a40020---request-for-ballot-from-an-overseas-voter-or-service-voter)
* [29A.40.050 - Special ballots.](#29a40050---special-ballots)
* [29A.40.070 - Date ballots mailed—Replacement ballots.](#29a40070---date-ballots-mailedreplacement-ballots)
* [29A.40.091 - Envelopes, declaration, and instructions—Voter's oath—Overseas and service voters—Return of ballots—County auditor's name. (Effective until January 1, 2022.)](#29a40091---envelopes-declaration-and-instructionsvoters-oathoverseas-and-service-votersreturn-of-ballotscounty-auditors-name-effective-until-january-1-2022)
* [29A.40.100 - Observers.](#29a40100---observers)
* [29A.40.110 - Processing incoming ballots.](#29a40110---processing-incoming-ballots)
* [29A.40.130 - Record of voters issued a ballot and voters who returned a ballot—Public access.](#29a40130---record-of-voters-issued-a-ballot-and-voters-who-returned-a-ballotpublic-access)
* [29A.40.160 - Voting centers.](#29a40160---voting-centers)
* [29A.40.170 - Ballot drop boxes.](#29a40170---ballot-drop-boxes)
* [29A.40.180 - Student engagement hubs.](#29a40180---student-engagement-hubs)
## **29A.40.010 - Ballots by mail.**
1. Each active registered voter of the state, overseas voter, and service voter **may request** a mail ballot for each general election, special election, or primary. Overseas voters and service voters are authorized to cast the same ballots, including those for special elections, as a registered voter of the state would receive under this chapter.

2. **Except as otherwise provided by law, a registered voter, overseas voter, or service voter desiring to cast an absentee ballot at a single election or primary must request the absentee ballot from his or her county auditor no later than ninety days nor earlier than the day before the election or primary at which the person seeks to vote. Except as otherwise provided by law, the request may be made in person, electronically, or in writing. Applications must include a copy of a valid photo identification as described in section 21 of this act. An application or request for an absentee ballot made under the authority of a federal statute or regulation will be considered and given the same effect as a request for an absentee ballot under this chapter.**

3. [Empty]

    a. **A voter requesting an absentee ballot for a primary may also request an absentee ballot for the following general election. A request by an overseas voter or service voter for an absentee ballot for a primary election will be considered as a request for an absentee ballot for the following general election.**

    b. **A voter requesting an absentee ballot for a special election may also request an absentee ballot for the following primary and general election. A request by an overseas voter or service voter for an absentee ballot for a special election will be considered as a request for an absentee ballot for the following primary and general election.**

4. **In requesting an absentee ballot, the voter shall state the address to which the absentee ballot should be sent. A request for an absentee ballot from an overseas voter or service voter must include the address of the last residence in the state of Washington and either a written application or the oath on the return envelope must include a declaration of the other qualifications of the applicant as an elector of this state. A request for an absentee ballot from any other voter must state the address at which that voter is currently registered to vote in the state of Washington or the county auditor shall verify that information from the voter registration records of the county.**

5. **A request for an absentee ballot from a registered voter who is within this state must be made directly to the auditor of the county to which the voter is registered. An absentee ballot request from a registered voter who is temporarily outside this state or from an overseas voter or service voter may be made either to the appropriate county auditor or to the secretary of state, who shall promptly forward the request to the appropriate county auditor.**

## 29A.40.020 - Request for ballot from an overseas voter or service voter.
1. A request for a ballot from an overseas voter or service voter must include the address of the last residence in the state of Washington.

2. No person, organization, or association may distribute any ballot materials that contain a return address other than that of the appropriate county auditor.

\[ [2011 c 10 § 36](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/2011-12/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/Senate/5124-S.SL.pdf?cite=2011%20c%2010%20§%2036); [2009 c 369 § 37](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/2009-10/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/Senate/5270-S.SL.pdf?cite=2009%20c%20369%20§%2037); [2003 c 111 § 1002](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/2003-04/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/Senate/5221-S.SL.pdf?cite=2003%20c%20111%20§%201002); [2001 c 241 § 2](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/2001-02/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/Senate/5275.SL.pdf?cite=2001%20c%20241%20§%202); \]

## 29A.40.050 - Special ballots.
1. County auditors shall provide special absentee ballots to be used for state primary or state general elections. An auditor shall provide a special absentee ballot only to a registered voter who completes an application stating that she or he will be unable to vote and return a regular ballot by normal mail delivery within the period provided for regular ballots.

A special absentee ballot may not be requested more than ninety days before the applicable state primary or general election. The special absentee ballot will list the offices and measures, if known, scheduled to appear on the state primary or general election ballot. The voter may use the special absentee ballot to write in the name of any eligible candidate for each office and vote on any measure.

2. The county auditor shall include a listing of any candidates who have filed before the time of the application for offices that will appear on the ballot at that primary or election and a list of any issues that have been referred to the ballot before the time of the application.

3. Write-in votes on special absentee ballots must be counted in the same manner provided by law for the counting of other write-in votes. The county auditor shall process and canvass the special absentee ballots provided under this section in the same manner as other ballots under this chapter and chapter 29A.60 RCW.

4. A voter who requests a special absentee ballot under this section may also request a regular ballot. If the regular absentee ballot is properly voted and returned, the special absentee ballot is void, and the county auditor shall reject it in whole when special absentee ballots are canvassed.

\[ [2011 c 10 § 37](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/2011-12/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/Senate/5124-S.SL.pdf?cite=2011%20c%2010%20§%2037); [2003 c 111 § 1005](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/2003-04/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/Senate/5221-S.SL.pdf?cite=2003%20c%20111%20§%201005); [2001 c 241 § 5](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/2001-02/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/Senate/5275.SL.pdf?cite=2001%20c%20241%20§%205); [1991 c 81 § 35](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/1991-92/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/House/1072.SL.pdf?cite=1991%20c%2081%20§%2035); [1987 c 346 § 21](http://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1987c346.pdf?cite=1987%20c%20346%20§%2021); \]

## **29A.40.070 - Date ballots mailed—Replacement ballots.**
1. Except where a recount or litigation is pending, the county auditor must mail ballots to each voter **who has requested an absentee ballot under this chapter** at least eighteen days before each primary or election, and as soon as possible for all subsequent registration changes.

2. Except where a recount or litigation is pending, the county auditor must mail ballots to each service and overseas voter **who has requested an absentee ballot under this chapter** at least thirty days before each special election, and at least forty‑five days before each primary or general election, or any special election that involves federal office. A request for a ballot made by an overseas or service voter after that day must be processed immediately.

3. A registered voter may obtain a replacement ballot if the ballot is destroyed, spoiled, lost, or not received by the voter. The voter may obtain the ballot by telephone request, by mail, electronically, or in person. The county auditor shall keep a record of each request for a replacement ballot.

4. Each county auditor shall certify to the office of the secretary of state the dates the ballots were mailed, or the reason and date the ballots will be mailed if the ballots were not mailed timely.

5. Failure to mail ballots as prescribed in this section does not by itself provide a basis for an election contest or other legal challenge to the results of a primary, general election, or special election.

## **29A.40.091 - Envelopes, declaration, and instructions—Voter's oath—Overseas and service voters—Return of ballots—County auditor's name. (Effective until January 1, 2022.)**
1. The county auditor shall send each voter **who has requested an absentee ballot under this chapter** a ballot, a security envelope in which to conceal the ballot after voting, a larger envelope in which to return the security envelope, a declaration that the voter must sign, and instructions on how to obtain information about the election, how to mark the ballot, and how to return the ballot to the county auditor. The calendar date of the election must be prominently displayed in bold type, twenty-point font or larger, on the envelope sent to the voter containing the ballot and other materials listed in this subsection:

    a. For all general elections in 2020 and after;

    b. For all primary elections in 2021 and after; and

    c. For all elections in 2022 and after.

2. The voter must swear under penalty of perjury that he or she meets the qualifications to vote, and has not voted in any other jurisdiction at this election. The declaration must clearly inform the voter that it is illegal to vote if he or she is not a United States citizen; it is illegal to vote if he or she has been convicted of a felony and has not had his or her voting rights restored; and it is illegal to cast a ballot or sign a ballot declaration on behalf of another voter. The ballot materials must provide space for the voter to sign the declaration, indicate the date on which the ballot was voted, and include a telephone number.

3. For overseas and service voters, the signed declaration constitutes the equivalent of a voter registration. Return envelopes for overseas and service voters must enable the ballot to be returned postage free if mailed through the United States postal service, United States armed forces postal service, or the postal service of a United States foreign embassy under 39 U.S.C. 3406.

4. The voter must be instructed to  return the ballot to the county auditor no later than 8:00 p.m. the day of the election or primary. Return envelopes for all election ballots must include prepaid postage. Service and overseas voters must be provided with instructions and a privacy sheet for returning the ballot and signed declaration by fax or email.

5. The county auditor's name may not appear on the security envelope, the return envelope, or on any voting instructions or materials included with the ballot if he or she is a candidate for office during the same year.

6. For purposes of this section, "prepaid postage" means any method of return postage paid by the county or state.

## 29A.40.100 - Observers.
County auditors must request that observers be appointed by the major political parties to be present during the processing of ballots at the counting center. County auditors have discretion to also request that observers be appointed by any campaigns or organizations. The absence of the observers will not prevent the processing of ballots if the county auditor has requested their presence.

\[ [2011 c 10 § 40](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/2011-12/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/Senate/5124-S.SL.pdf?cite=2011%20c%2010%20§%2040); [2003 c 111 § 1010](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/2003-04/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/Senate/5221-S.SL.pdf?cite=2003%20c%20111%20§%201010); [2001 c 241 § 9](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/2001-02/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/Senate/5275.SL.pdf?cite=2001%20c%20241%20§%209); \]

## 29A.40.110 - Processing incoming ballots.
1. The opening and subsequent processing of return envelopes for any primary or election may begin upon receipt. The tabulation of absentee ballots must not commence until after 8:00 p.m. on the day of the primary or election.

2. All received return envelopes must be placed in secure locations from the time of delivery to the county auditor until their subsequent opening. After opening the return envelopes, the county canvassing board shall place all of the ballots in secure storage until processing. Ballots may be taken from the inner envelopes and all the normal procedural steps may be performed to prepare these ballots for tabulation.

3. The canvassing board, or its designated representatives, shall examine the postmark on the return envelope and signature on the declaration before processing the ballot. The ballot must either be received no later than 8:00 p.m. on the day of the primary or election, or must be postmarked no later than the day of the primary or election. All personnel assigned to verify signatures must receive training on statewide standards for signature verification. Personnel shall verify that the voter's signature on the ballot declaration is the same as the signature of that voter in the registration files of the county. Verification may be conducted by an automated verification system approved by the secretary of state. A variation between the signature of the voter on the ballot declaration and the signature of that voter in the registration files due to the substitution of initials or the use of common nicknames is permitted so long as the surname and handwriting are clearly the same.

4. If the postmark is missing or illegible, the date on the ballot declaration to which the voter has attested determines the validity, as to the time of voting, for that ballot. For overseas voters and service voters, the date on the declaration to which the voter has attested determines the validity, as to the time of voting, for that ballot. Any overseas voter or service voter may return the signed declaration and voted ballot by fax or email by 8:00 p.m. on the day of the primary or election, and the county auditor must use established procedures to maintain the secrecy of the ballot.

\[ [2011 c 349 § 18](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/2011-12/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/Senate/5171-S.SL.pdf?cite=2011%20c%20349%20§%2018); [2011 c 348 § 4](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/2011-12/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/House/1000.SL.pdf?cite=2011%20c%20348%20§%204); [2011 c 10 § 41](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/2011-12/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/Senate/5124-S.SL.pdf?cite=2011%20c%2010%20§%2041); [2009 c 369 § 40](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/2009-10/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/Senate/5270-S.SL.pdf?cite=2009%20c%20369%20§%2040); [2006 c 207 § 4](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/2005-06/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/House/2479-S.SL.pdf?cite=2006%20c%20207%20§%204); [2006 c 206 § 6](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/2005-06/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/House/2477.SL.pdf?cite=2006%20c%20206%20§%206); [2005 c 243 § 5](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/2005-06/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/Senate/5499-S.SL.pdf?cite=2005%20c%20243%20§%205); [2003 c 111 § 1011](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/2003-04/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/Senate/5221-S.SL.pdf?cite=2003%20c%20111%20§%201011); prior:  2001 c 241 § 10; [1991 c 81 § 32](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/1991-92/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/House/1072.SL.pdf?cite=1991%20c%2081%20§%2032); [1987 c 346 § 14](http://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1987c346.pdf?cite=1987%20c%20346%20§%2014); [1977 ex.s. c 361 § 78](http://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1977ex1c361.pdf?cite=1977%20ex.s.%20c%20361%20§%2078); [1973 c 140 § 1](http://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1973c140.pdf?cite=1973%20c%20140%20§%201); [1965 c 9 § 29.36.060](http://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1965c9.pdf?cite=1965%20c%209%20§%2029.36.060); prior:  1963 ex.s. c 23 § 5; [1955 c 167 § 7](http://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1955c167.pdf?cite=1955%20c%20167%20§%207); [1955 c 50 § 2](http://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1955c50.pdf?cite=1955%20c%2050%20§%202); prior: 1933 ex.s. c 41 § 5, part; 1921 c 143 § 6, part; 1917 c 159 § 4, part; 1915 c 189 § 4, part; RRS § 5285, part; \]

## 29A.40.130 - Record of voters issued a ballot and voters who returned a ballot—Public access.
Each county auditor shall maintain in his or her office, open for public inspection, a record of all voters issued a ballot and all voters who returned a ballot. For each primary, special election, or general election, any political party, committee, or person may request a list of all registered voters who have or have not voted. Such requests shall be handled as public records requests pursuant to chapter 42.56 RCW.

\[ [2011 c 10 § 42](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/2011-12/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/Senate/5124-S.SL.pdf?cite=2011%20c%2010%20§%2042); [2003 c 111 § 1013](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/2003-04/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/Senate/5221-S.SL.pdf?cite=2003%20c%20111%20§%201013); [1991 c 81 § 33](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/1991-92/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/House/1072.SL.pdf?cite=1991%20c%2081%20§%2033); [1987 c 346 § 17](http://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1987c346.pdf?cite=1987%20c%20346%20§%2017); [1973 1st ex.s. c 61 § 1](http://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1973ex1c61.pdf?cite=1973%201st%20ex.s.%20c%2061%20§%201); \]

## **29A.40.160 - Voting centers.**
1. Each county auditor shall open a voting center each primary, special election, and general election. The voting center shall be open during business hours during the voting period, which begins **at 8:00 a.m.** and ends at 8:00 p.m. on the **two Saturdays and Sunday before and the** day of, the primary, special election, or general election. **Voting at a voting center may only be conducted during the voting period.**

2. Each county auditor shall register voters in person at each of the following locations in the county:

    a. At the county auditor's office;

    b. At the division of elections, if located in a separate city from the county auditor's office; and

    c. For each presidential general election, at a voting center in each city in the county with a population of one hundred thousand or greater, which does not have a voting center as required in (a) or (b) of this subsection.

3. Voting centers shall be located in public buildings or buildings that are leased by a public entity including, but not limited to, libraries. **Centers established per this section must be geographically located so as to provide all voters in the county an equal opportunity to cast a ballot, insofar as practicable.**

4. Each voting center, and at least one of the other locations designated by the county auditor to allow voters to register in person pursuant to **section 32 of this act**, must provide voter registration materials, ballots, provisional ballots, disability access voting units, sample ballots, instructions on how to properly vote the ballot, a ballot drop box, and voters' pamphlets, if a voters' pamphlet has been published.

5. Each voting center must be accessible to persons with disabilities. Each state agency and entity of local government shall permit the use of any of its accessible facilities as voting centers when requested by a county auditor.

6. Each voting center must provide at least one voting unit certified by the secretary of state that provides access to individuals who are blind or visually impaired, enabling them to vote with privacy and independence.

7. No person may interfere with a voter attempting to vote in a voting center. Interfering with a voter attempting to vote is a violation of RCW 29A.84.510.

8. Before opening the voting center, the voting equipment shall be inspected to determine if it has been properly prepared for voting. If the voting equipment is capable of direct tabulation of each voter's choices, the county auditor shall verify that no votes have been registered for any issue or office, and that the device has been sealed with a unique numbered seal at the time of final preparation and logic and accuracy testing. A log must be made of all device numbers and seal numbers.

9. The county auditor shall require any person desiring to vote at a voting center to either sign a ballot declaration or provide identification.

    a. The signature on the declaration must be compared to the signature on the voter registration record before the ballot may be counted. If the voter registered using a mark, or can no longer sign his or her name, the election officers shall require the voter to be identified by another registered voter.

    b. The identification must be valid photo identification, such as a driver's license, state identification card, student identification card, tribal identification card, or employer identification card. A tribal identification card is not required to include a residential address or an expiration date to be considered valid under this section. Any individual who desires to vote in person but cannot provide identification shall be issued a provisional ballot, which shall be accepted if the signature on the declaration matches the signature on the voter's registration record.

10. Provisional ballots must be accompanied by a declaration and security envelope, as required by RCW 29A.40.091, and space for the voter's name, date of birth, current and former registered address, reason for the provisional ballot, and disposition of the provisional ballot. The voter shall vote and return the provisional ballot at the voting center. The voter must be provided information on how to ascertain whether the provisional ballot was counted and, if applicable, the reason why the vote was not counted.

11. Any voter may take printed or written material into the voting device to assist in casting his or her vote. The voter shall not use this material to electioneer and shall remove it when he or she leaves the voting center.

12. If any voter states that he or she is unable to cast his or her votes due to a disability, the voter may designate a person of his or her choice, or two election officers, to enter the voting booth and record the votes as he or she directs.

13. No voter is entitled to vote more than once at a primary, special election, or general election. If a voter incorrectly marks a ballot, he or she may be issued a replacement ballot.

14. A voter who has already returned a ballot but requests to vote at a voting center shall be issued a provisional ballot. The canvassing board shall not count the provisional ballot if it finds that the voter has also voted a regular ballot in that primary, special election, or general election.

15. Any voter who is inside or in line at the voting center at 8:00 p.m. on the day of the primary, special election, or general election must be allowed to vote.

16. For each primary, special election, and general election, the county auditor may provide election services at locations in addition to the voting center. The county auditor has discretion to establish which services will be provided at the additional locations, and which days and hours the locations will be open.

## 29A.40.170 - Ballot drop boxes.
1. The county auditor must prevent overflow of each ballot drop box to allow a voter to deposit his or her ballot securely. Ballots must be removed from a ballot drop box by at least two people, with a record kept of the date and time ballots were removed, and the names of people removing them. Ballots from drop boxes must be returned to the counting center in secured transport containers. A copy of the record must be placed in the container, and one copy must be transported with the ballots to the counting center, where the seal number must be verified by the county auditor or a designated representative. All ballot drop boxes must be secured at 8:00 p.m. on the day of the primary, special election, or general election.

2. The county auditor must establish a minimum of one ballot drop box per fifteen thousand registered voters in the county and a minimum of one ballot drop box in each city, town, and census-designated place in the county with a post office.

3. At the request of a federally recognized Indian tribe with a reservation in the county, the county auditor must establish at least one ballot drop box on the Indian reservation on a site selected by the tribe that is accessible to the county auditor by a public road.

4. A federally recognized Indian tribe may designate at least one building as a ballot pickup and collection location at no cost to the tribe. The designated building must be accessible to the county auditor by a public road. The county auditor of the county in which the building is located must collect ballots from that location in compliance with the procedures in subsection (1) of this section.

\[ [2019 c 6 § 5](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/2019-20/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/Senate/5079-S.SL.pdf?cite=2019%20c%206%20§%205); \]

## **29A.40.180 - Student engagement hubs.**
1. Each state university, regional university, and The Evergreen State College as defined in RCW 28B.10.016 and each higher education campus as defined in RCW 28B.45.012 shall open a nonpartisan student engagement hub on its campus**during the voting period provided in RCW 29A.40.160(1)**. All student engagement hubs must allow students to download their exact ballot from an online portal. Upon request of the student government organization to the administration and the county auditor, the student engagement hub at a state university, regional university, or The Evergreen State College as defined in RCW 28B.10.016 must allow voters to register in person pursuant to **section 32 of this act** and provide voter registration materials and ballots.

2. Each institution shall contract with the county auditor for the operation of a student engagement hub under this section.

3. Student engagement hubs are not voting centers as outlined in RCW 29A.40.160 and must be operated in a manner that avoids partisan influence or electioneering.

## **29A.40.XXX - TBD**
**
1. Each county auditor shall maintain in his or her office, open for public inspection, a record of the requests he or she has received for absentee ballots under this chapter.

2. The information from the requests must be recorded and lists of this information must be available no later than twenty-four hours after their receipt.

3. This information about absentee voters must be available according to the date of the requests and by legislative district. It must include the name of each applicant, the address and precinct in which the voter maintains a voting residence, the date on which an absentee ballot was issued to this voter, if applicable, the type of absentee ballot, and the address to which the ballot was or is to be mailed, if applicable.

4. The auditor shall make copies of these records available to the public for the actual cost of production and copying.


[ 2021 c XXX § 28; ]**

## **29A.40.XXX - TBD**
**
The qualifications of any absentee voter may be challenged before the voted ballot is received. The canvassing board has the authority to determine the legality of any absentee ballot challenged under this section. Challenged ballots must be handled in accordance with chapter 29A.08 RCW.


[ 2021 c XXX § 29; ]**

## **29A.40.XXX - TBD**
**
The information on the envelopes or instructions for overseas voters and service voters must explain that:

1. Return postage is free if the ballot is mailed through the United States postal service, United States armed forces postal service, or the postal service of a United States foreign embassy;

2. The date of the signature is considered the date of mailing;

3. The envelope must be signed by election day;

4. The signed declaration on the envelope is the equivalent of voter registration;

5. A voter may fax a voted ballot and the accompanying envelope if the voter agrees to waive secrecy. The ballot will be counted if the original documents are received before the certification of the election; and

6. A voter may obtain a ballot via electronic mail, which the voter may print out, vote, and return by mail. In order to facilitate the electronic acquisition of ballots by overseas and service voters, the ballot instructions must include the web site of the office of the secretary of state.


[ 2021 c XXX § 30; ]**

## **29A.40.XXX - TBD**
**
1. A person who knowingly collects voted or unvoted absentee ballots from another person is guilty of a class C felony punishable under RCW 9A.20.021. An election official, a United States postal service worker, or any other person who is allowed by law to transmit United States mail is deemed not to have collected an early ballot if the official, worker, or other person is engaged in official duties.

2. This section does not apply to a:

    a. Family member;

    b. Household member; or

    c. Caregiver, of the voter.

3. For the purposes of this section:

    a. "Caregiver" means a person who provides medical or health care assistance to the voter in a residence, nursing care institution, hospice facility, assisted living center, assisted living facility, assisted living home, residential care institution, adult day health care facility, or adult foster care home.

    b. "Collects" means to gain possession or control of an early ballot.

    c. "Family member" means a person who is related to the voter by blood, marriage, adoption, or legal guardianship.

    d. "Household member" means a person who resides at the same residence as the voter.


[ 2021 c XXX § 31; ]**

## **29A.40.XXX - TBD**
**
1. Each county auditor shall maintain in his or her office, open for public inspection, a record of the requests he or she has received for absentee ballots under this chapter.

2. The information from the requests must be recorded and lists of this information must be available no later than twenty-four hours after their receipt.

3. This information about absentee voters must be available according to the date of the requests and by legislative district. It must include the name of each applicant, the address and precinct in which the voter maintains a voting residence, the date on which an absentee ballot was issued to this voter, if applicable, the type of absentee ballot, and the address to which the ballot was or is to be mailed, if applicable.

4. The auditor shall make copies of these records available to the public for the actual cost of production and copying.


[ 2021 c XXX § 28; ]**

## **29A.40.XXX - TBD**
**
The qualifications of any absentee voter may be challenged before the voted ballot is received. The canvassing board has the authority to determine the legality of any absentee ballot challenged under this section. Challenged ballots must be handled in accordance with chapter 29A.08 RCW.


[ 2021 c XXX § 29; ]**

## **29A.40.XXX - TBD**
**
The information on the envelopes or instructions for overseas voters and service voters must explain that:

1. Return postage is free if the ballot is mailed through the United States postal service, United States armed forces postal service, or the postal service of a United States foreign embassy;

2. The date of the signature is considered the date of mailing;

3. The envelope must be signed by election day;

4. The signed declaration on the envelope is the equivalent of voter registration;

5. A voter may fax a voted ballot and the accompanying envelope if the voter agrees to waive secrecy. The ballot will be counted if the original documents are received before the certification of the election; and

6. A voter may obtain a ballot via electronic mail, which the voter may print out, vote, and return by mail. In order to facilitate the electronic acquisition of ballots by overseas and service voters, the ballot instructions must include the web site of the office of the secretary of state.


[ 2021 c XXX § 30; ]**

## **29A.40.XXX - TBD**
**
1. A person who knowingly collects voted or unvoted absentee ballots from another person is guilty of a class C felony punishable under RCW 9A.20.021. An election official, a United States postal service worker, or any other person who is allowed by law to transmit United States mail is deemed not to have collected an early ballot if the official, worker, or other person is engaged in official duties.

2. This section does not apply to a:

    a. Family member;

    b. Household member; or

    c. Caregiver, of the voter.

3. For the purposes of this section:

    a. "Caregiver" means a person who provides medical or health care assistance to the voter in a residence, nursing care institution, hospice facility, assisted living center, assisted living facility, assisted living home, residential care institution, adult day health care facility, or adult foster care home.

    b. "Collects" means to gain possession or control of an early ballot.

    c. "Family member" means a person who is related to the voter by blood, marriage, adoption, or legal guardianship.

    d. "Household member" means a person who resides at the same residence as the voter.


[ 2021 c XXX § 31; ]**
