# Second Substitute Senate Bill 5000 - Session Law Chapter 171 Year 2021 as Recommended by Ways & Means

[Source](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/2021-22/Xml/Bills/Session%20Laws/Senate/5000-S2.SL.xml)
## Section 1
This section is the tax preference performance statement for the tax preferences contained in sections 2 and 3, chapter . . ., Laws of 2021 (sections 2 and 3 of this act). The performance statement is only intended to be used for subsequent evaluation of the tax preference. It is not intended to create a private right of action by any party or be used to determine eligibility for preferential tax treatment.
(1) The legislature categorizes the tax preferences as ones intended to induce certain designated behavior by taxpayers, as indicated in RCW 82.32.808(2)(a).
(2) It is the legislature's specific public policy objective to increase the use of hydrogen fuel cell electric vehicles in Washington as another way of promoting clean alternative fuel vehicle adoption in the state. It is the legislature's intent to establish an eight-year pilot tax incentive program for fuel cell electric vehicles by creating a temporary partial sales and use tax exemption on fuel cell electric vehicles in order to reduce the price charged to customers and to evaluate the feasibility of wider adoption of the use of fuel cell electric technology in transportation.
(3) Since the tax incentive created in sections 2 and 3 of this act is limited to eight years, the joint legislative audit and review committee must, within the committee's appropriations, evaluate the effectiveness of this tax incentive on the number of hydrogen fuel cell vehicles titled in the state by November 1, 2028.
(4) The department of licensing and the department of revenue must, within the departments' respective appropriations, provide data needed for the joint legislative audit and review committee analysis. In addition to the data source described under this subsection, the joint legislative audit and review committee may use any other data it deems necessary.
