# 44.04 - General provisions.
* [44.04.010 - Date of regular sessions.](#4404010---date-of-regular-sessions)
* [44.04.021 - Commencement of terms of office.](#4404021---commencement-of-terms-of-office)
* [44.04.040 - Vouchers for pay and mileage of members—Warrants.](#4404040---vouchers-for-pay-and-mileage-of-memberswarrants)
* [44.04.041 - Warrants for pay and mileage of members—Payment of.](#4404041---warrants-for-pay-and-mileage-of-memberspayment-of)
* [44.04.050 - Vouchers for pay of employees—Warrants.](#4404050---vouchers-for-pay-of-employeeswarrants)
* [44.04.051 - Warrants for pay of employees—Payment of.](#4404051---warrants-for-pay-of-employeespayment-of)
* [44.04.060 - Vouchers for incidental expenses—Warrants.](#4404060---vouchers-for-incidental-expenseswarrants)
* [44.04.070 - Warrants for incidental expenses—Payment of.](#4404070---warrants-for-incidental-expensespayment-of)
* [44.04.090 - Warrants for subsistence and lodging.](#4404090---warrants-for-subsistence-and-lodging)
* [44.04.100 - Contest of election—Depositions.](#4404100---contest-of-electiondepositions)
* [44.04.120 - Members' allowances when engaged in legislative business.](#4404120---members-allowances-when-engaged-in-legislative-business)
* [44.04.125 - Allowances of members-elect when attending meetings.](#4404125---allowances-of-members-elect-when-attending-meetings)
* [44.04.170 - Information from municipal associations.](#4404170---information-from-municipal-associations)
* [44.04.200 - References to regular session of the legislature.](#4404200---references-to-regular-session-of-the-legislature)
* [44.04.210 - Gender-neutral terms.](#4404210---gender-neutral-terms)
* [44.04.230 - Teachers' insurance benefits—Reimbursement.](#4404230---teachers-insurance-benefitsreimbursement)
* [44.04.240 - Teachers' insurance benefits—Payment of warrants.](#4404240---teachers-insurance-benefitspayment-of-warrants)
* [44.04.250 - Surplus computer equipment—Donation to schools.](#4404250---surplus-computer-equipmentdonation-to-schools)
* [44.04.260 - Legislative committees and agencies—Oversight.](#4404260---legislative-committees-and-agenciesoversight)
* [44.04.280 - State laws—Respectful language.](#4404280---state-lawsrespectful-language)
* [44.04.290 - Periodic review of plans for bicycle, pedestrian, and equestrian facilities.](#4404290---periodic-review-of-plans-for-bicycle-pedestrian-and-equestrian-facilities)
* [44.04.300 - Joint transportation committee—Created—Duties.](#4404300---joint-transportation-committeecreatedduties)
* [44.04.310 - Joint transportation committee—Allowances, expenses.](#4404310---joint-transportation-committeeallowances-expenses)
* [44.04.320 - Oral history program.](#4404320---oral-history-program)
* [44.04.325 - Legislative oral history committee—Members, staff.](#4404325---legislative-oral-history-committeemembers-staff)
* [44.04.330 - Legislative oral history committee—Duties.](#4404330---legislative-oral-history-committeeduties)
* [44.04.335 - Oral history activities—Funding—Joint rules.](#4404335---oral-history-activitiesfundingjoint-rules)
* [44.04.340 - Oral history activities—Gifts, grants, conveyances—Expenditures—Joint rules.](#4404340---oral-history-activitiesgifts-grants-conveyancesexpendituresjoint-rules)
* [44.04.345 - Legislative oral history account.](#4404345---legislative-oral-history-account)
* [44.04.360 - Joint higher education committee—Purpose.](#4404360---joint-higher-education-committeepurpose)
* [44.04.362 - Joint higher education committee—Membership.](#4404362---joint-higher-education-committeemembership)
* [44.04.364 - Joint higher education committee—Meetings—Reimbursement—Rules—Staffing.](#4404364---joint-higher-education-committeemeetingsreimbursementrulesstaffing)
* [44.04.370 - Gina Grant Bull memorial legislative page scholarship program.](#4404370---gina-grant-bull-memorial-legislative-page-scholarship-program)
* [44.04.375 - Legislative page scholarship program—Gifts, grants, conveyances, bequests, devises—Expenditures—Joint rules.](#4404375---legislative-page-scholarship-programgifts-grants-conveyances-bequests-devisesexpendituresjoint-rules)
* [44.04.380 - Gina Grant Bull memorial legislative page scholarship account.](#4404380---gina-grant-bull-memorial-legislative-page-scholarship-account)
* [44.04.390 - Code of conduct—Training for registered lobbyists.](#4404390---code-of-conducttraining-for-registered-lobbyists)
* [44.04.400 - Rosa Franklin legislative internship program scholarship.](#4404400---rosa-franklin-legislative-internship-program-scholarship)
* [44.04.405 - Rosa Franklin legislative internship program scholarship—Gifts, grants, conveyances, bequests, devises—Expenditures—Joint rules.](#4404405---rosa-franklin-legislative-internship-program-scholarshipgifts-grants-conveyances-bequests-devisesexpendituresjoint-rules)
* [44.04.410 - Rosa Franklin legislative internship program scholarship account.](#4404410---rosa-franklin-legislative-internship-program-scholarship-account)
## 44.04.010 - Date of regular sessions.
Regular sessions of the legislature shall be held annually, commencing on the second Monday of January.

\[ [1980 c 87 § 27](http://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1980c87.pdf?cite=1980%20c%2087%20§%2027); [1979 ex.s. c 48 § 1](http://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1979ex1c48.pdf?cite=1979%20ex.s.%20c%2048%20§%201); [1891 c 20 § 1](http://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1891c20.pdf?cite=1891%20c%2020%20§%201); RRS § 8177; \]

## 44.04.021 - Commencement of terms of office.
The regular term of office of each senator and representative shall commence on the second Monday in January following the date of election.

\[ [1987 c 13 § 1](http://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1987c13.pdf?cite=1987%20c%2013%20§%201); [1981 c 288 § 68](http://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1981c288.pdf?cite=1981%20c%20288%20§%2068); \]

## 44.04.040 - Vouchers for pay and mileage of members—Warrants.
The chief clerk of the house of representatives and the secretary of the senate are hereby directed to prepare vouchers for the state treasurer for the mileage and daily pay of members of the legislature on presentation of certificates showing amounts due for miles traveled and services rendered to dates specified. The certificates shall be signed by the speaker or president, and countersigned by the chief clerk or secretary, respectively, of the body to which the members belong. The state treasurer shall issue warrants which shall be in favor of and payable to the order of the persons named in said certificates.

\[ [1973 c 106 § 17](http://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1973c106.pdf?cite=1973%20c%20106%20§%2017); [1890 p 6 § 1](http://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1890c6.pdf?cite=1890%20p%206%20§%201); RRS § 8150; \]

## 44.04.041 - Warrants for pay and mileage of members—Payment of.
Upon presentation of a warrant drawn as provided for in RCW 44.04.040, to the state treasurer, that officer shall pay the same out of any money in the treasury of the state appropriated for the expenses of the legislature of the state of Washington: PROVIDED, That should there be no money in the state treasury covered by such appropriation, the state treasurer shall indorse such fact on the warrant presented, and said warrant shall draw interest from the date of such presentation and indorsement, and shall be payable thereafter in the manner provided by existing law and custom.

\[ [1890 p 6 § 2](http://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1890c6.pdf?cite=1890%20p%206%20§%202); RRS § 8151; \]

## 44.04.050 - Vouchers for pay of employees—Warrants.
The chief clerk of the house of representatives and the secretary of the senate shall prepare vouchers for the state treasurer for sums covering amounts due officers and employees of the legislature on presentation of certificates signed by the speaker or president, and countersigned by the chief clerk or secretary of the body in which the service of the officer or employee is rendered, and showing amounts due to dates specified. The state treasurer shall issue warrants which shall be drawn in favor and be made payable to the order of the officer or employee named in each certificate.

\[ [1973 c 106 § 18](http://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1973c106.pdf?cite=1973%20c%20106%20§%2018); [1890 p 3 § 1](http://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1890c3.pdf?cite=1890%20p%203%20§%201); RRS § 8148; \]

## 44.04.051 - Warrants for pay of employees—Payment of.
Upon presentation to the state treasurer of a warrant drawn as provided for in RCW 44.04.050, that officer shall pay the same from any money in the state treasury appropriated for the expenses of the legislature of the state of Washington: PROVIDED, That should there be no money in the treasury of the state covered by such appropriation, the state treasurer shall indorse such fact on the warrant presented, and said warrant shall draw interest from date of such indorsement and shall be payable thereafter as is provided by law and custom.

\[ [1890 p 3 § 2](http://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1890c3.pdf?cite=1890%20p%203%20§%202); RRS § 8149; \]

## 44.04.060 - Vouchers for incidental expenses—Warrants.
The chief clerk of the house of representatives and the secretary of the senate are hereby directed to prepare vouchers for the state treasurer for the incidental expenses of the legislature, on presentation of certificates showing amounts due for material furnished and services rendered to dates specified. The certificates shall be signed by the speaker or president, and countersigned by the sergeant-at-arms, respectively, of the body ordering the expenditures. The state treasurer shall issue warrants which shall be in favor of and payable to the order of the persons named in said certificates.

\[ [1973 c 106 § 19](http://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1973c106.pdf?cite=1973%20c%20106%20§%2019); [1890 p 10 § 1](http://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1890c10.pdf?cite=1890%20p%2010%20§%201); RRS § 8152; \]

## 44.04.070 - Warrants for incidental expenses—Payment of.
Upon presentation of a warrant, drawn as provided for in RCW 44.04.060, to the state treasurer, that officer shall pay the same out of any money in the treasury of the state appropriated for the expenses of the legislature of the state of Washington: PROVIDED, That should there be no money in the state treasury covered by such appropriation, the state treasurer shall indorse such fact on the warrant presented, and said warrant shall draw interest from the date of such presentation and indorsement, and shall be payable thereafter in the manner provided by existing law and custom.

\[ [1890 p 10 § 2](http://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1890c10.pdf?cite=1890%20p%2010%20§%202); RRS § 8153. FORMER PARTS OF SECTION:  1890 p 3 § 2, now codified as RCW  44.04.051.  1890 p 6 § 2, now codified as RCW  44.04.041; \]

## 44.04.090 - Warrants for subsistence and lodging.
The state treasurer shall issue warrants for said reimbursement supported by affidavits that the reimbursement is claimed for expenses of subsistence and lodging actually incurred without itemization and without receipts. Such warrants shall be immediately paid from any funds appropriated for the purpose.

\[ [1973 c 106 § 20](http://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1973c106.pdf?cite=1973%20c%20106%20§%2020); [1941 c 173 § 2](http://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1941c173.pdf?cite=1941%20c%20173%20§%202); Rem. Supp. 1941 § 8153-2; \]

## 44.04.100 - Contest of election—Depositions.
Any person desiring to contest the election of any member of the legislature, may, at any time after the presumptive election of such member and before the convening of the ensuing regular session of the legislature, have the testimony of witnesses, to be used in support of such contest, taken and perpetuated, by serving not less than three days' written notice upon the member whose election he or she desires to contest, of his or her intention to institute such contest and that he or she desires to take the testimony of certain witnesses named in such notice, at a time and place named therein, before a notary public duly commissioned and qualified and residing in the county where the presumptive member resides, giving the name of such notary public, which deposition shall be taken in the manner provided by law for the taking of depositions in civil actions in the superior court. The presumptive member of the legislature, whose election is to be contested, shall have the right to appear, in person or by counsel, at the time and place named in the notice, and cross examine any witness produced and have such cross examination made a part of such deposition, and to produce witnesses and have their depositions taken for the purpose of sustaining his or her election. The notary public before whom such deposition is taken shall transmit such depositions to the presiding officer of the senate, or house of representatives, as the case may be, in which said contest is to be instituted, in the care of the secretary of state, at the state capitol, by registered mail, and it shall be the duty of the secretary of state upon the convening of the legislature to transmit said depositions, unopened, to the presiding officer of the senate, or the house of representatives, as the case may be, to whom it is addressed, and in case such contest is instituted said depositions may be opened and read in evidence in the manner provided by law for the opening and introduction of depositions in civil actions in the superior court.

\[ [2009 c 549 § 6001](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/2009-10/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/Senate/5038.SL.pdf?cite=2009%20c%20549%20§%206001); [1927 c 205 § 1](http://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1927c205.pdf?cite=1927%20c%20205%20§%201); RRS § 8162-1; Code 1881 §§ 3125-3139; \]

## 44.04.120 - Members' allowances when engaged in legislative business.
Each member of the senate or house of representatives when serving on official legislative business shall be entitled to receive, in lieu of per diem or any other payment, for each day or major portion thereof in which he or she is actually engaged in legislative business or business of the committee, commission, or council, notwithstanding any laws to the contrary, an allowance in an amount fixed by the secretary of the senate and chief clerk of the house, respectively, in accordance with applicable rules and resolutions of each body. Such allowance shall be reasonably calculated to reimburse expenses, exclusive of mileage, which are ordinary and necessary in the conduct of legislative business, recognizing cost variances which are encountered in different locales. The allowance authorized shall not exceed the greater of forty-four dollars per day or the maximum daily amount determined under RCW 43.03.050, as now or hereafter amended. In addition, a mileage allowance shall be paid at the rate per mile provided for in RCW 43.03.060, as now or hereafter amended, when authorized by the house, committee, commission, or council of which he or she is a member and on the business of which he or she is engaged.

\[ [2009 c 549 § 6002](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/2009-10/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/Senate/5038.SL.pdf?cite=2009%20c%20549%20§%206002); [1985 c 3 § 1](http://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1985c3.pdf?cite=1985%20c%203%20§%201); [1979 ex.s. c 255 § 3](http://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1979ex1c255.pdf?cite=1979%20ex.s.%20c%20255%20§%203); [1974 ex.s. c 157 § 2](http://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1974ex1c157.pdf?cite=1974%20ex.s.%20c%20157%20§%202); [1973 1st ex.s. c 197 § 5](http://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1973ex1c197.pdf?cite=1973%201st%20ex.s.%20c%20197%20§%205); [1967 ex.s. c 112 § 4](http://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1967ex1c112.pdf?cite=1967%20ex.s.%20c%20112%20§%204); [1963 ex.s. c 7 § 1](http://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1963ex1c7.pdf?cite=1963%20ex.s.%20c%207%20§%201); [1959 ex.s. c 10 § 1](http://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1959ex1c10.pdf?cite=1959%20ex.s.%20c%2010%20§%201); \]

## 44.04.125 - Allowances of members-elect when attending meetings.
Each member-elect of the senate or house of representatives who attends any meeting of the legislature or any of its committees, upon the invitation of the committee on rules of his or her respective house, shall be entitled to receive per diem, mileage, and incidental expense allowances at the rates prescribed in chapter 44.04 RCW, as now or hereafter amended.

\[ [1975 1st ex.s. c 185 § 1](http://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1975ex1c185.pdf?cite=1975%201st%20ex.s.%20c%20185%20§%201); \]

## 44.04.170 - Information from municipal associations.
It shall be the duty of each association of municipal corporations or municipal officers, which is recognized by law and utilized as an official agency for the coordination of the policies and/or administrative programs of municipal corporations, to submit biennially, or oftener as necessary, to the governor and to the legislature the joint recommendations of such participating municipalities regarding changes which would affect the efficiency of such municipal corporations. Such associations shall include but shall not be limited to the Washington state association of fire commissioners and the Washington state school directors' association.

\[ [2007 c 31 § 7](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/2007-08/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/Senate/5231-S.SL.pdf?cite=2007%20c%2031%20§%207); [1999 c 153 § 59](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/1999-00/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/House/1264.SL.pdf?cite=1999%20c%20153%20§%2059); [1970 ex.s. c 69 § 2](http://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1970ex1c69.pdf?cite=1970%20ex.s.%20c%2069%20§%202); \]

## 44.04.200 - References to regular session of the legislature.
After June 12, 1980, all references in the Revised Code of Washington to a regular session of the legislature mean a regular session during an odd- or even-numbered year unless the context clearly requires otherwise.

\[ [1980 c 87 § 1](http://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1980c87.pdf?cite=1980%20c%2087%20§%201); \]

## 44.04.210 - Gender-neutral terms.
1. All statutes, memorials, and resolutions enacted, adopted, or amended by the legislature after July 1, 1983, shall be written in gender-neutral terms unless a specification of gender is intended.

2. No statute, memorial, or resolution is invalid because it does not comply with this section.

\[ [1983 c 20 § 3](http://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1983c20.pdf?cite=1983%20c%2020%20§%203); \]

## 44.04.230 - Teachers' insurance benefits—Reimbursement.
The chief clerk of the house of representatives and the secretary of the senate shall prepare vouchers for the state treasurer for sums covering amounts due a school district for any teacher who is on a leave of absence as a legislator, and who has chosen to continue insurance benefits provided by the school district, in lieu of insurance benefits provided to that legislator as a state employee. The amount of reimbursement due the school district is for the actual cost of continuing benefits, but may not exceed the cost of the insurance benefits package that would otherwise be provided through the health care authority.

\[ [1998 c 62 § 1](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/1997-98/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/House/1971-S.SL.pdf?cite=1998%20c%2062%20§%201); \]

## 44.04.240 - Teachers' insurance benefits—Payment of warrants.
Upon presentation to the state treasurer of a warrant issued by the treasurer and drawn for the purposes under RCW 44.04.230, the treasurer shall pay the amount necessary from appropriated funds. If sufficient funds have not been appropriated, the treasurer shall endorse the warrant and the warrant draws interest from the date of the endorsement until paid.

\[ [1998 c 62 § 3](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/1997-98/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/House/1971-S.SL.pdf?cite=1998%20c%2062%20§%203); \]

## 44.04.250 - Surplus computer equipment—Donation to schools.
The chief clerk of the house of representatives may authorize surplus computers and computer-related equipment owned by the house, the secretary of the senate may authorize surplus computers and computer-related equipment owned by the senate, and the directors of legislative agencies may authorize surplus computers and computer-related equipment owned by his or her respective agency, to be donated to school districts and educational service districts. This section shall not be construed to limit the discretion of the legislature regarding disposal of its surplus property.

\[ [1999 c 186 § 2](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/1999-00/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/Senate/5175-S.SL.pdf?cite=1999%20c%20186%20§%202); \]

## 44.04.260 - Legislative committees and agencies—Oversight.
The joint legislative audit and review committee, the joint transportation committee, the select committee on pension policy, the legislative evaluation and accountability program committee, the office of legislative support services, the joint higher education committee, and the *joint legislative systems committee are subject to such operational policies, procedures, and oversight as are deemed necessary by the facilities and operations committee of the senate and the executive rules committee of the house of representatives to ensure operational adequacy of the agencies of the legislative branch. As used in this section, "operational policies, procedures, and oversight" includes the development process of biennial budgets, contracting procedures, personnel policies, and compensation plans, selection of a chief administrator, facilities, and expenditures. This section does not grant oversight authority to the facilities and operations committee of the senate over any standing committee of the house of representatives or oversight authority to the executive rules committee of the house of representatives over any standing committee of the senate.

\[ [2012 c 229 § 204](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/2011-12/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/House/2483-S2.SL.pdf?cite=2012%20c%20229%20§%20204); [2012 c 113 § 6](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/2011-12/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/House/2705.SL.pdf?cite=2012%20c%20113%20§%206); [2005 c 319 § 112](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/2005-06/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/Senate/5513.SL.pdf?cite=2005%20c%20319%20§%20112); [2003 c 295 § 12](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/2003-04/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/House/1204-S.SL.pdf?cite=2003%20c%20295%20§%2012); [2001 c 259 § 1](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/2001-02/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/House/1391-S.SL.pdf?cite=2001%20c%20259%20§%201); \]

## 44.04.280 - State laws—Respectful language.
1. The legislature recognizes that language used in reference to individuals with disabilities shapes and reflects society's attitudes towards people with disabilities. Many of the terms currently used diminish the humanity and natural condition of having a disability. Certain terms are demeaning and create an invisible barrier to inclusion as equal community members. The legislature finds it necessary to clarify preferred language for new and revised laws by requiring the use of terminology that puts the person before the disability.

2. [Empty]

    a.  The code reviser is directed to avoid all references to: Disabled, developmentally disabled, mentally disabled, mentally ill, mentally retarded, handicapped, cripple, and crippled, in any new statute, memorial, or resolution, and to change such references in any existing statute, memorial, or resolution as sections including these references are otherwise amended by law.

    b.  The code reviser is directed to replace terms referenced in (a) of this subsection as appropriate with the following revised terminology: "Individuals with disabilities," "individuals with developmental disabilities," "individuals with mental illness," and "individuals with intellectual disabilities."

3. No statute, memorial, or resolution is invalid because it does not comply with this section.

4. The replacement of outmoded terminology with more appropriate references may not be construed as changing the application of any provision of this code to any person.

\[ [2010 c 94 § 2](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/2009-10/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/House/2490.SL.pdf?cite=2010%20c%2094%20§%202); [2009 c 377 § 1](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/2009-10/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/House/1835.SL.pdf?cite=2009%20c%20377%20§%201); [2004 c 175 § 1](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/2003-04/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/House/2663.SL.pdf?cite=2004%20c%20175%20§%201); \]

## 44.04.290 - Periodic review of plans for bicycle, pedestrian, and equestrian facilities.
The house and senate transportation committees shall periodically review the six-year comprehensive plans submitted by cities and counties for expenditures for bicycle, pedestrian, and equestrian facilities prepared pursuant to RCW 35.77.010 and 36.81.121.

\[ [1977 ex.s. c 235 § 12](http://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1977ex1c235.pdf?cite=1977%20ex.s.%20c%20235%20§%2012); [1975 1st ex.s. c 268 § 2](http://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1975ex1c268.pdf?cite=1975%201st%20ex.s.%20c%20268%20§%202); \]

## 44.04.300 - Joint transportation committee—Created—Duties.
The joint transportation committee is created. The executive committee of the joint committee consists of the chairs and ranking members of the house and senate transportation committees. The chairs of the house and senate transportation committees shall serve as cochairs of the joint committee. All members of the house and senate standing committees on transportation are eligible for membership of the joint committee and shall serve when appointed by the executive committee.

The joint transportation committee shall review and research transportation programs and issues in order to educate and promote the dissemination of transportation research to state and local government policymakers, including legislators and associated staff. All four members of the executive committee shall approve the annual work plan. Membership of the committee may vary depending on the subject matter of oversight and research projects. The committee may also make recommendations for functional or performance audits to the transportation performance audit board.

The executive committee shall adopt rules and procedures for its operations.

\[ [2005 c 319 § 12](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/2005-06/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/Senate/5513.SL.pdf?cite=2005%20c%20319%20§%2012); \]

## 44.04.310 - Joint transportation committee—Allowances, expenses.
The members of the joint transportation committee will receive allowances while attending meetings of the committee or subcommittees and while engaged in other authorized business of the committees as provided in RCW 44.04.120. Subject to RCW 44.04.260, all expenses incurred by the committee must be paid upon voucher forms as provided by the office of financial management and signed by the cochairs of the joint committee, or their authorized designees, and the authority of the chair or vice chair to sign vouchers continues until their successors are selected. Vouchers may be drawn upon funds appropriated for the expenses of the committee.

\[ [2005 c 319 § 13](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/2005-06/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/Senate/5513.SL.pdf?cite=2005%20c%20319%20§%2013); \]

## 44.04.320 - Oral history program.
1. The secretary of the senate and the chief clerk of the house of representatives, at the direction of the legislative oral history committee, shall administer and conduct a program to record and document oral histories of current and former members and staff of the Washington state legislature, and other citizens who have participated in the political history of the Washington state legislature. The secretary of the senate and the chief clerk of the house of representatives may contract with independent oral historians or the history departments of the state universities to interview and record oral histories. The manuscripts and publications shall be made available for research and reference through the state archives. The manuscripts, together with current and historical photographs, may be published for distribution to libraries and the general public, and posted on the legislative oral history website.

2. The oral history of a person who occupied positions, or was staff to a person who occupied positions, in more than one branch of government, shall be conducted by the entity authorized to conduct oral histories of persons in the position last held by the person who is the subject of the oral history. However, the person being interviewed may select the entity he or she wishes to prepare his or her oral history.

\[ [2008 c 222 § 3](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/2007-08/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/House/1741-S3.SL.pdf?cite=2008%20c%20222%20§%203); [1991 c 237 § 1](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/1991-92/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/House/2141.SL.pdf?cite=1991%20c%20237%20§%201); \]

## 44.04.325 - Legislative oral history committee—Members, staff.
1. A legislative oral history committee is created, which shall consist of the following individuals:

    a.  Four members of the house of representatives, two from each of the two largest caucuses of the house, appointed by the speaker of the house of representatives;

    b.  Four members of the senate, two from each of the two largest caucuses of the senate, appointed by the president of the senate;

    c.  The chief clerk of the house of representatives; and

    d.  The secretary of the senate.

2. Ex officio members may be appointed by a majority vote of the committee's members appointed under subsection (1) of this section.

3. The chair of the committee shall be elected by a majority vote of the committee members appointed under subsection (1) of this section.

4. Staff support for the committee must be provided by the office of the secretary of the senate and the office of the chief clerk of the house of representatives.

\[ [2020 c 114 § 8](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/2019-20/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/House/2402.SL.pdf?cite=2020%20c%20114%20§%208); [2008 c 222 § 4](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/2007-08/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/House/1741-S3.SL.pdf?cite=2008%20c%20222%20§%204); [1991 c 237 § 2](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/1991-92/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/House/2141.SL.pdf?cite=1991%20c%20237%20§%202); \]

## 44.04.330 - Legislative oral history committee—Duties.
The legislative oral history committee shall have the following responsibilities:

1. To select appropriate oral history interview candidates and subjects;

2. To select transcripts or portions of transcripts, and related historical material, for publication;

3. To advise the secretary of the senate and the chief clerk of the house of representatives on the format and length of individual interview series and on appropriate issues and subjects for related series of interviews;

4. To advise the secretary of the senate and the chief clerk of the house of representatives on the appropriate subjects, format, and length of interviews and on the process for conducting oral history interviews;

5. To advise the secretary of the senate and the chief clerk of the house of representatives on joint programs and activities with state universities, colleges, museums, and other groups conducting oral histories; and

6. To advise the secretary of the senate and the chief clerk of the house of representatives on other aspects of the administration of the oral history program and on the conduct of individual interview projects.

\[ [2008 c 222 § 5](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/2007-08/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/House/1741-S3.SL.pdf?cite=2008%20c%20222%20§%205); [1991 c 237 § 3](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/1991-92/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/House/2141.SL.pdf?cite=1991%20c%20237%20§%203); \]

## 44.04.335 - Oral history activities—Funding—Joint rules.
The secretary of the senate and the chief clerk of the house of representatives may fund oral history activities through donations as provided in RCW 44.04.340 and through funds in the legislative gift center account created in RCW 44.73.020. The activities may include, but not be limited to, conducting interviews, preparing and indexing transcripts, publishing manuscripts and photographs, and presenting displays and programs. Donations that do not meet the criteria of the legislative oral history program may not be accepted. The secretary of the senate and the chief clerk of the house of representatives shall adopt joint rules necessary to implement this section.

\[ [2008 c 222 § 6](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/2007-08/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/House/1741-S3.SL.pdf?cite=2008%20c%20222%20§%206); \]

## 44.04.340 - Oral history activities—Gifts, grants, conveyances—Expenditures—Joint rules.
1. The secretary of the senate and the chief clerk of the house of representatives may solicit and accept gifts, grants, conveyances, bequests, and devises of real or personal property, or both, in trust or otherwise, and sell, lease, exchange, invest, or expend these donations or the proceeds, rents, profits, and income from the donations except as limited by the donor's terms.

2. Moneys received under this section may be used only for conducting oral histories.

3. Moneys received under this section must be deposited in the legislative oral history account established in RCW 44.04.345.

4. The secretary of the senate and the chief clerk of the house of representatives shall adopt joint rules to govern and protect the receipt and expenditure of the proceeds.

\[ [2008 c 222 § 7](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/2007-08/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/House/1741-S3.SL.pdf?cite=2008%20c%20222%20§%207); \]

## 44.04.345 - Legislative oral history account.
The legislative oral history account is created in the custody of the state treasurer. All moneys received under RCW 44.04.340 and from the legislative gift center account created in RCW 44.73.020 must be deposited in the account. Expenditures from the account may be made only for the purposes of the legislative oral history program under RCW 44.04.320. Only the secretary of the senate or the chief clerk of the house of representatives or their designee may authorize expenditures from the account. An appropriation is not required for expenditures, but the account is subject to allotment procedures under chapter 43.88 RCW.

\[ [2008 c 222 § 8](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/2007-08/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/House/1741-S3.SL.pdf?cite=2008%20c%20222%20§%208); \]

## 44.04.360 - Joint higher education committee—Purpose.
1. A joint higher education committee is created.

2. The purpose of the joint higher education committee is to:

    a.  By December 1, 2012, and annually thereafter, review the work of the student achievement council and provide legislative feedback;

    b.  Engage with the student achievement council and the higher education community to create greater communication, coordination, and alignment between the higher education system and the expectations of the legislature; and

    c.  Provide recommendations for higher education policy, including proposed legislation, to the higher education and fiscal committees of the legislature.

\[ [2012 c 229 § 201](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/2011-12/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/House/2483-S2.SL.pdf?cite=2012%20c%20229%20§%20201); \]

## 44.04.362 - Joint higher education committee—Membership.
1. The joint higher education committee shall consist of the following members:

    a.  Four members of the house of representatives, two each appointed by the leadership of the two largest caucuses, with at least one member from each caucus who is a member of the house of representatives ways and means committee and at least one member from each caucus who is a member of the house of representatives higher education committee; and

    b.  Four members of the senate, two each appointed by the leadership of the two largest caucuses, with at least one member from each caucus who is a member of the senate ways and means committee and at least one member from each caucus who is a member of the senate higher education and workforce development committee.

2. All members must be appointed by July 1, 2012, and must serve a term of no less than two years.

3. Vacancies on the joint higher education committee shall be filled by appointment by either the president of the senate or the speaker of the house of representatives. All such vacancies shall be filled from the same political party and from the same house as the member whose seat was vacated.

4. The joint higher education committee shall appoint its own cochairs, representing two different parties and the two chambers of the legislature.

\[ [2012 c 229 § 202](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/2011-12/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/House/2483-S2.SL.pdf?cite=2012%20c%20229%20§%20202); \]

## 44.04.364 - Joint higher education committee—Meetings—Reimbursement—Rules—Staffing.
1. The joint higher education committee shall meet at least twice annually after the conclusion of the legislative session.

2. The members of the joint higher education committee shall serve without additional compensation, but shall be reimbursed in accordance with RCW 44.04.120 while attending meetings of the joint higher education committee.

3. The joint higher education committee shall adopt rules and procedures for its operations.

4. Staff support for the joint higher education committee must be provided by the senate committee services and the house of representatives office of program research.

\[ [2012 c 229 § 203](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/2011-12/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/House/2483-S2.SL.pdf?cite=2012%20c%20229%20§%20203); \]

## 44.04.370 - Gina Grant Bull memorial legislative page scholarship program.
The secretary of the senate and the chief clerk of the house of representatives may administer and conduct a legislative page scholarship program to provide resources for Washington students who participate in the page programs of the senate or house of representatives. The scholarship program should provide assistance to students, based on financial need, who qualify for a page program. The program is called the Gina Grant Bull memorial legislative page scholarship program.

\[ [2017 c 322 § 1](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/2017-18/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/Senate/5346-S.SL.pdf?cite=2017%20c%20322%20§%201); \]

## 44.04.375 - Legislative page scholarship program—Gifts, grants, conveyances, bequests, devises—Expenditures—Joint rules.
1. The secretary of the senate and the chief clerk of the house of representatives may solicit and accept gifts, grants, conveyances, bequests, and devises of real or personal property, or both, in trust or otherwise, and sell, lease, exchange, or expend these donations or the proceeds, rents, profits, and income from the donations except as limited by the donor's terms. Any legislative member or legislative employee may solicit the same types of contributions for the secretary of the senate and the chief clerk of the house of representatives.

2. Moneys received under this section may be used only for establishing and operating the legislative page scholarship program authorized in RCW 44.04.370.

3. Moneys received under this section must be deposited in the Gina Grant Bull memorial legislative page scholarship account established in RCW 44.04.380.

4. The secretary of the senate and the chief clerk of the house of representatives must adopt joint rules to govern and protect the receipt and expenditure of the proceeds.

\[ [2017 c 322 § 2](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/2017-18/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/Senate/5346-S.SL.pdf?cite=2017%20c%20322%20§%202); \]

## 44.04.380 - Gina Grant Bull memorial legislative page scholarship account.
The Gina Grant Bull memorial legislative page scholarship account is created in the custody of the state treasurer. All moneys received under RCW 44.04.370 must be deposited in the account. Expenditures from the account may be made only for the purposes of the legislative page scholarship program in RCW 44.04.370. Only the secretary of the senate or the chief clerk of the house of representatives or their designee may authorize expenditures from the account. An appropriation is not required for expenditures, but the account is subject to allotment procedures under chapter 43.88 RCW.

\[ [2017 c 322 § 3](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/2017-18/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/Senate/5346-S.SL.pdf?cite=2017%20c%20322%20§%203); \]

## 44.04.390 - Code of conduct—Training for registered lobbyists.
The chief clerk of the house of representatives and the secretary of the senate shall develop and provide a training course for registered lobbyists regarding the legislative code of conduct and any policies related to appropriate conduct adopted by the senate or the house of representatives.

\[ [2019 c 469 § 1](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/2019-20/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/Senate/5861-S.SL.pdf?cite=2019%20c%20469%20§%201); \]

## 44.04.400 - Rosa Franklin legislative internship program scholarship.
The secretary of the senate and the chief clerk of the house of representatives may administer and conduct the Rosa Franklin legislative internship program scholarship to provide resources for Washington students who participate in the legislative internship program of the senate and house of representatives. The scholarship program should provide assistance to students, based on financial need, who are accepted as legislative interns. The program is called the Rosa Franklin legislative internship program scholarship.

\[ [2021 c 108 § 1](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/2021-22/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/Senate/5431.SL.pdf?cite=2021%20c%20108%20§%201); \]

## 44.04.405 - Rosa Franklin legislative internship program scholarship—Gifts, grants, conveyances, bequests, devises—Expenditures—Joint rules.
1. The secretary of the senate and the chief clerk of the house of representatives may solicit and accept gifts, grants, conveyances, bequests, and devises of real or personal property, or both, in trust or otherwise, and sell, lease, exchange, or expend these donations or the proceeds, rents, profits, and income from the donations except as limited by the donor's terms. Any legislative member or legislative employee may solicit the same types of contributions for the secretary of the senate and the chief clerk of the house of representatives.

2. Moneys received under this section may be used only for establishing and operating the Rosa Franklin legislative internship program scholarship authorized in RCW 44.04.400.

3. Moneys received under this section must be deposited in the legislative internship program scholarship account established in RCW 44.04.410.

4. The secretary of the senate and the chief clerk of the house of representatives must adopt joint rules to govern and protect the receipt and expenditure of the proceeds.

\[ [2021 c 108 § 2](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/2021-22/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/Senate/5431.SL.pdf?cite=2021%20c%20108%20§%202); \]

## 44.04.410 - Rosa Franklin legislative internship program scholarship account.
The Rosa Franklin legislative internship program scholarship account is created in the custody of the state treasurer. All moneys received under RCW 44.04.405 must be deposited in the account. Expenditures from the account may be made only for the purposes of the Rosa Franklin legislative internship program scholarship created in RCW 44.04.400. Only the secretary of the senate or the chief clerk of the house of representatives or their designee may authorize expenditures from the account. An appropriation is not required for expenditures, but the account is subject to allotment procedures under chapter 43.88 RCW.

\[ [2021 c 108 § 3](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/2021-22/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/Senate/5431.SL.pdf?cite=2021%20c%20108%20§%203); \]


## **44.04.XXX - TBD**
**
The legislature affirms that the people of Washington vested the legislative authority of the state of Washington in the legislature under Article II, section 1 of the state Constitution. Because the legislative authority is vested in the legislature by the people, the legislature may not transfer the legislative authority to another branch or agency of government.


[ 2021 c XXX § 2; ]**

## **44.04.XXX - TBD**
**
1. Every bill analysis and bill report published by the house of representatives office of program research or senate committee services, or their successor entities, must contain a section indicating whether the bill authorizes an agency to adopt a new rule under chapter 34.05 RCW.

2. Failure to comply with subsection (1) of this section does not invalidate any law or rule.

3. This section does not create any civil liability on the part of the state or any state agency, officer, employee, or agent.

4. This section does not create a private right of action.


[ 2021 c XXX § 3; ]**
