# 43.34 - Capitol committee.
* [43.34.010 - Composition of committee.](#4334010---composition-of-committee)
* [43.34.015 - Secretary of committee—Committee records.](#4334015---secretary-of-committeecommittee-records)
* [43.34.040 - Buildings—Erection—Improvements.](#4334040---buildingserectionimprovements)
* [43.34.080 - Capitol campus design advisory committee—Generally.](#4334080---capitol-campus-design-advisory-committeegenerally)
* [43.34.090 - Building names.](#4334090---building-names)
## **43.34.010 - Composition of committee.**
1. **The state capitol committee is established as an interbranch advisory committee of state government.** The  lieutenant governor, the secretary of state,  the commissioner of public lands, **the director, two members of the state senate, and two members of the house of representatives,** ex officio, shall constitute the  committee. **The members of the senate and house of representatives must be appointed by the president of the senate and the speaker of the house of representatives, respectively, from each of the two largest caucuses in the respective bodies.**

2. **The committee shall:**

    a. **Make recommendations to the legislature and the governor that contribute to the attainment of architectural, historical, aesthetic, functional, and environmental excellence in design and maintenance of the state capitol public and historic facilities;**

    b. **Advise the legislature and the governor on the acquisition and use of real property for state government purposes in Thurston county;**

    c. **Receive and share advice and recommendations from the work group; and**

    d. **Advise the department on amendments and modifications to the master plan for state capitol buildings and grounds created under RCW 79.24.530.**

3. **The department shall provide staff support services to the committee.**

## **43.34.015 - Secretary of committee—Committee records.**
The **director** shall **appoint a person to serve as** the secretary of the state capitol committee. **All** records of the committee shall be filed **with the department**.

## **43.34.080 - Capitol campus design advisory committee—Generally.**
1. The capitol campus design **technical** advisory **work group** is established as an advisory group to the  committee and the director **. The work group assists the committee by reviewing** programs, planning, design, and landscaping of state capitol facilities and grounds and **by making** recommendations that  contribute to the attainment of architectural, aesthetic, functional, and environmental excellence in design and maintenance of **state capitol public and historic facilities**.

2. The **work group** shall consist of the following persons who shall be appointed by and serve at the pleasure of the director :

    a. Two architects;

    b. A landscape architect; and

    c. An urban planner.

3. The director  shall appoint the chair and vice chair and shall provide the staff and resources necessary for implementing this section. The **work group** shall meet at least once every **90** days and at the call of the chair.

4. The members of the **work group** shall be reimbursed as provided in RCW 43.03.220 and 44.04.120.

5. The **work group** shall review plans and designs affecting state capitol **public and historic** facilities as they are developed. The **work group's** review shall include:

    a.

Compliance with the capitol campus master plan and design concepts **under RCW 79.24.530**;

    b. The design, siting, and grouping of state capitol **public and historic** facilities relative to the service needs of state government and the impact upon the local community's economy, environment, traffic patterns, and other factors;

    c. The relationship of overall state capitol facility planning to the respective comprehensive plans for long-range urban development of the cities of Olympia, Lacey, and Tumwater, and Thurston county; and

    d. Landscaping plans and designs, including planting proposals, street furniture, sculpture, monuments, and access to the capitol campus and buildings.

## **43.34.090 - Building names.**
1. The legislature shall approve names for new or existing buildings on the state capitol grounds based upon recommendations from the  committee and the director , with the advice of the **work group**, subject to the following limitations:

    a. An existing building may be renamed only after a substantial renovation or a change in the predominant tenant agency headquartered in the building.

    b. A new or existing building may be named or renamed after:

        i. An individual who has played a significant role in Washington history;

        ii. The purpose of the building;

        iii. The single or predominant tenant agency headquartered in the building;

        iv. A significant place name or natural place in Washington;

    v. A Native American tribe located in Washington;

    vi. A group of people or type of person;

    vii. Any other appropriate person consistent with this section as recommended by the director .

    c. The names on the facades of the state capitol group shall not be removed.

2. The legislature shall approve names for new or existing public rooms or spaces on the west capitol campus based upon recommendations from the  committee and the director , subject to the following limitations:

    a. An existing room or space may be renamed only after a substantial renovation;

    b. A new or existing room or space may be named or renamed only after:

        i. An individual who has played a significant role in Washington history;

        ii. The purpose of the room or space;

        iii. A significant place name or natural place in Washington;

        iv. A Native American tribe located in Washington;

    v. A group of people or type of person;

    vi. Any other appropriate person consistent with this section as recommended by the director .

3. When naming or renaming buildings, rooms, and spaces under this section, consideration must be given to: (a) Any disparity that exists with respect to the gender of persons after whom buildings, rooms, and spaces are named on the state capitol grounds; (b) the diversity of human achievement; and (c) the diversity of the state's citizenry and history.

4. For purposes of this section, "state capitol grounds" means buildings and land owned by the state and otherwise designated as state capitol grounds, including the west capitol campus, the east capitol campus, the north capitol campus, the Tumwater campus, the Lacey campus, Sylvester Park, Centennial Park, the Old Capitol Building, and Capitol Lake.

## **43.34.XXX - TBD**
**
The definitions in this section apply throughout this chapter unless the context clearly requires otherwise.

1. "Committee" means the state capitol committee established in RCW 43.34.010.

2. "Department" means the department of enterprise services.

3. "Director" means the director of the department of enterprise services.

4. "State capitol public and historic facilities" has the meaning in RCW 79.24.710.

5. "Work group" means the entity established in RCW 43.34.080.


[ 2021 c XXX § 2; ]**

## **43.34.XXX - TBD**
**
The definitions in this section apply throughout this chapter unless the context clearly requires otherwise.

1. "Committee" means the state capitol committee established in RCW 43.34.010.

2. "Department" means the department of enterprise services.

3. "Director" means the director of the department of enterprise services.

4. "State capitol public and historic facilities" has the meaning in RCW 79.24.710.

5. "Work group" means the entity established in RCW 43.34.080.


[ 2021 c XXX § 2; ]**
