# 47.20 - Miscellaneous projects.
* [47.20.570 - Manette bridge authorized.](#4720570---manette-bridge-authorized)
* [47.20.580 - Washington State University highway authorized.](#4720580---washington-state-university-highway-authorized)
* [47.20.590 - University of Washington approach authorized.](#4720590---university-of-washington-approach-authorized)
* [47.20.600 - Washington State University highway, University of Washington approach—Acquisition of property.](#4720600---washington-state-university-highway-university-of-washington-approachacquisition-of-property)
* [47.20.605 - Washington State University highway, University of Washington approach—Public use.](#4720605---washington-state-university-highway-university-of-washington-approachpublic-use)
* [47.20.610 - Washington State University highway, University of Washington approach—Condemnation.](#4720610---washington-state-university-highway-university-of-washington-approachcondemnation)
* [47.20.620 - Washington State University highway, University of Washington approach—Measure of damage to buildings.](#4720620---washington-state-university-highway-university-of-washington-approachmeasure-of-damage-to-buildings)
* [47.20.630 - Washington State University highway, University of Washington approach—Sale of buildings, personalty, acquired in acquisition of land.](#4720630---washington-state-university-highway-university-of-washington-approachsale-of-buildings-personalty-acquired-in-acquisition-of-land)
* [47.20.635 - University of Washington approach—Ordinance requisite—Construction and maintenance.](#4720635---university-of-washington-approachordinance-requisiteconstruction-and-maintenance)
* [47.20.640 - Reestablishment and redesignation of intersections when highway relocated.](#4720640---reestablishment-and-redesignation-of-intersections-when-highway-relocated)
* [47.20.645 - Interstate 90 corridor—Legislative finding.](#4720645---interstate-90-corridorlegislative-finding)
* [47.20.647 - Interstate 90 corridor—Withdrawal of local governments from project—Effect on use of state funds.](#4720647---interstate-90-corridorwithdrawal-of-local-governments-from-projecteffect-on-use-of-state-funds)
* [47.20.653 - Interstate 90 corridor—Court proceedings, priority.](#4720653---interstate-90-corridorcourt-proceedings-priority)
* [47.20.700 - State route No. 504 (Spirit Lake Memorial Highway)—Extension and parking facilities.](#4720700---state-route-no-504-spirit-lake-memorial-highwayextension-and-parking-facilities)
* [47.20.710 - Quinault Tribal Highway—Agreement authorized—Route.](#4720710---quinault-tribal-highwayagreement-authorizedroute)
* [47.20.715 - Quinault Tribal Highway—Maintenance, operation, improvements—Intersections, access.](#4720715---quinault-tribal-highwaymaintenance-operation-improvementsintersections-access)
* [47.20.720 - Quinault Tribal Highway—Certain portion as limited access.](#4720720---quinault-tribal-highwaycertain-portion-as-limited-access)
* [47.20.725 - Quinault Tribal Highway—Acquisition of remaining right-of-way.](#4720725---quinault-tribal-highwayacquisition-of-remaining-right-of-way)
* [47.20.730 - Quinault Tribal Highway—Department as agent.](#4720730---quinault-tribal-highwaydepartment-as-agent)
* [47.20.735 - Quinault Tribal Highway—Authority to seek federal funding.](#4720735---quinault-tribal-highwayauthority-to-seek-federal-funding)
* [47.20.780 - Design-build—Competitive bidding.](#4720780---design-buildcompetitive-bidding)
* [47.20.785 - Design-build—Qualified projects.](#4720785---design-buildqualified-projects)
* [47.20.900 - Severability—1975 1st ex.s. c 272.](#4720900---severability1975-1st-exs-c-272)
## 47.20.570 - Manette bridge authorized.
The department is authorized and directed to construct a bridge across Port Washington Narrows connecting state route number 304 at or near Bremerton with state route number 303 on the Manette Peninsula; to make surveys and plans; and to condemn or otherwise acquire such lands as are necessary or proper for approaches to the bridge or for the relocation of any portion of the highway to locate the bridge at the most feasible place. The bridge shall become and be maintained as a part of the state highway system.

\[ [1984 c 7 § 140](http://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1984c7.pdf?cite=1984%20c%207%20§%20140); [1970 ex.s. c 51 § 173](http://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1970ex1c51.pdf?cite=1970%20ex.s.%20c%2051%20§%20173); [1961 c 13 § 47.20.570](http://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1961c13.pdf?cite=1961%20c%2013%20§%2047.20.570); 1947 c 4 p 6 § 2; Rem. Supp. 1947 § 6584a-1; \]

## 47.20.580 - Washington State University highway authorized.
The department is hereby authorized and directed to locate, construct, pave, and maintain a suitable highway on the most feasible route beginning in the vicinity of the stadium of the Washington State University and extending in a northwesterly direction to a connection with state route number 27, near the north boundary of the city of Pullman.

\[ [1984 c 7 § 141](http://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1984c7.pdf?cite=1984%20c%207%20§%20141); [1970 ex.s. c 51 § 174](http://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1970ex1c51.pdf?cite=1970%20ex.s.%20c%2051%20§%20174); [1961 c 13 § 47.20.580](http://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1961c13.pdf?cite=1961%20c%2013%20§%2047.20.580); [1945 c 27 § 1](http://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1945c27.pdf?cite=1945%20c%2027%20§%201); Rem. Supp. 1945 § 6402-40; \]

## 47.20.590 - University of Washington approach authorized.
The department is hereby authorized and directed to select and locate a suitable and fitting street and highway approach to the University of Washington campus in the city of Seattle, from Roosevelt Way to Fifteenth Avenue northeast, including an underpass beneath the surface of Roosevelt Way, and necessary approaches to the underpass.

\[ [1984 c 7 § 142](http://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1984c7.pdf?cite=1984%20c%207%20§%20142); [1961 c 13 § 47.20.590](http://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1961c13.pdf?cite=1961%20c%2013%20§%2047.20.590); [1945 c 27 § 2](http://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1945c27.pdf?cite=1945%20c%2027%20§%202); Rem. Supp. 1945 § 6402-41; \]

## 47.20.600 - Washington State University highway, University of Washington approach—Acquisition of property.
The department is hereby authorized and directed in the name of the state of Washington to acquire by purchase, gift, or condemnation, any and all private real estate, rights, and interests necessary to locate, construct, and maintain the Washington State University highway and the University of Washington approach provided for herein.

\[ [1984 c 7 § 143](http://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1984c7.pdf?cite=1984%20c%207%20§%20143); [1961 c 13 § 47.20.600](http://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1961c13.pdf?cite=1961%20c%2013%20§%2047.20.600); [1945 c 27 § 3](http://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1945c27.pdf?cite=1945%20c%2027%20§%203); Rem. Supp. 1945 § 6402-42; \]

## 47.20.605 - Washington State University highway, University of Washington approach—Public use.
The use of the private real estate, rights, and interests, selected by the department as necessary for the approach, underpass, and highway is declared to be a public use.

\[ [1984 c 7 § 144](http://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1984c7.pdf?cite=1984%20c%207%20§%20144); [1961 c 13 § 47.20.605](http://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1961c13.pdf?cite=1961%20c%2013%20§%2047.20.605); [1945 c 27 § 4](http://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1945c27.pdf?cite=1945%20c%2027%20§%204); Rem. Supp. 1945 § 6402-43; \]

## 47.20.610 - Washington State University highway, University of Washington approach—Condemnation.
In case of condemnation to secure any real estate, rights, or interests authorized under this chapter, the court actions shall be brought in the name of the state of Washington in the respective counties in which the real estate is located and in the manner provided by law for acquiring property for public uses for the state. In such actions the selection of the real estate, rights, and interests by the department is, in the absence of bad faith, arbitrary, capricious, or fraudulent action, conclusive upon the court and judge before which the action is brought that the real estate, rights, and interests are necessary for public use for the purposes sought.

\[ [1984 c 7 § 145](http://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1984c7.pdf?cite=1984%20c%207%20§%20145); [1961 c 13 § 47.20.610](http://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1961c13.pdf?cite=1961%20c%2013%20§%2047.20.610); [1945 c 27 § 5](http://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1945c27.pdf?cite=1945%20c%2027%20§%205); Rem. Supp. 1945 § 6402-44; \]

## 47.20.620 - Washington State University highway, University of Washington approach—Measure of damage to buildings.
If, in any condemnation proceeding authorized herein, it appears that there is any building wholly or partially upon any of the real estate to be taken, the jury, or the court, if the jury be waived, shall add to the value of the land taken the amount of damages to the building. If the entire building is taken, or if the building is damaged so that it cannot be readjusted to the real estate not taken, then the measure of damages shall be the fair cash value of the building. If part of a building is taken or damaged and the building can be readjusted or replaced on the real estate remaining, then the measure of damages shall be the cost of readjusting or moving the building, or part thereof left, together with the depreciation in the market value of said building by reason of said readjustment or moving.

\[ [1961 c 13 § 47.20.620](http://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1961c13.pdf?cite=1961%20c%2013%20§%2047.20.620); [1945 c 27 § 6](http://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1945c27.pdf?cite=1945%20c%2027%20§%206); Rem. Supp. 1945 § 6402-45; \]

## 47.20.630 - Washington State University highway, University of Washington approach—Sale of buildings, personalty, acquired in acquisition of land.
The department shall have power to sell at public or private sale any building, equipment, or fixtures acquired in the acquisition of the real estate for such price as it shall fix and to execute to the purchaser upon payment of the purchase price a bill of sale in the name of the state. Proceeds of the sale shall be placed in the motor vehicle fund of the state treasury. The department shall have power to permit occupation of buildings on real estate so acquired for such specified limited time as it deems will lapse before construction of the approach, underpass, and highway can be undertaken; and in behalf of the state it may be shown in any condemnation proceeding the period during which such occupancy will be permitted for the purpose of mitigating damages.

\[ [1984 c 7 § 146](http://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1984c7.pdf?cite=1984%20c%207%20§%20146); [1961 c 13 § 47.20.630](http://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1961c13.pdf?cite=1961%20c%2013%20§%2047.20.630); [1945 c 27 § 7](http://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1945c27.pdf?cite=1945%20c%2027%20§%207); Rem. Supp. 1945 § 6402-46; \]

## 47.20.635 - University of Washington approach—Ordinance requisite—Construction and maintenance.
No action may be taken by the department for the acquisition of real estate, rights, and interests for the approach and underpass to the University of Washington unless and until the city of Seattle, through its legislative authority, enacts an ordinance providing that the city of Seattle will, within three months after the necessary real estate, rights, and interests have been secured by the state as provided in this chapter, begin the work of grading, paving, and such other work as is necessary to complete and render available for use of the public, the approach and underpass and approaches to the underpass; and further providing that the city of Seattle shall thereafter keep and maintain the approach and underpass and approach to the underpass in a good state of repair and suitable for public travel and use, which construction and maintenance work the city of Seattle is hereby authorized and empowered to do and perform.

\[ [1984 c 7 § 147](http://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1984c7.pdf?cite=1984%20c%207%20§%20147); [1961 c 13 § 47.20.635](http://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1961c13.pdf?cite=1961%20c%2013%20§%2047.20.635); [1945 c 27 § 8](http://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1945c27.pdf?cite=1945%20c%2027%20§%208); Rem. Supp. 1945 § 6402-47; \]

## 47.20.640 - Reestablishment and redesignation of intersections when highway relocated.
In any case where a state highway is relocated in such manner that it ceases to intersect another state highway, the department is authorized to extend and designate either of the state highways to reestablish an appropriate intersection.

\[ [1984 c 7 § 148](http://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1984c7.pdf?cite=1984%20c%207%20§%20148); [1967 ex.s. c 145 § 44](http://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1967ex1c145.pdf?cite=1967%20ex.s.%20c%20145%20§%2044); [1961 c 13 § 47.20.640](http://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1961c13.pdf?cite=1961%20c%2013%20§%2047.20.640); [1953 c 82 § 1](http://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1953c82.pdf?cite=1953%20c%2082%20§%201); \]

## 47.20.645 - Interstate 90 corridor—Legislative finding.
The legislature finds that the department initiated route studies for the location of that segment of the national system of interstate and defense highways (interstate system) between south Bellevue and state route No. 5 in Seattle in 1957 culminating in a corridor public hearing and adoption of a corridor in 1963; that thereafter the department, utilizing a multidisciplinary design team and soliciting the broadest public participation, developed a series of designs culminating in a public design hearing in 1970, a public limited access hearing in 1971, and adoption of a design and limited access plan for the facility in 1971; that commencing in 1970 the proposed facility has been the subject of numerous lawsuits and administrative proceedings that have prevented advancement of the project to construction; that since further development of the project was enjoined by federal courts in 1971 the cost of constructing the project has increased by more than one hundred million dollars; that the traffic congestion and traffic hazards existing in the existing highway corridor between south Bellevue, Mercer Island, and the city of Seattle are no longer tolerable; that after more than seventeen years of studies the public interest now requires that final decisions regarding the appropriate system for meeting the transportation requirements between south Bellevue and the city of Seattle be made promptly and in accordance with a prescribed schedule.

It is therefore the sense of the legislature that further protracted delay in establishing the transportation system to be constructed between south Bellevue and state route No. 5 in the city of Seattle is contrary to the interest of the people of this state and can no longer be tolerated as acceptable public administration. Accordingly the schedule for finally determining the character of transportation modes between south Bellevue and state route No. 5 in the city of Seattle as set forth in RCW 47.20.645 through 47.20.653 and 47.20.900 is adopted as the public policy of this state.

\[ [1984 c 7 § 149](http://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1984c7.pdf?cite=1984%20c%207%20§%20149); [1975 1st ex.s. c 272 § 1](http://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1975ex1c272.pdf?cite=1975%201st%20ex.s.%20c%20272%20§%201); \]

## 47.20.647 - Interstate 90 corridor—Withdrawal of local governments from project—Effect on use of state funds.
1. The Puget Sound council of governments (until July 1, 1975, known as the Puget Sound governmental conference) now engaged in a study of the withdrawal from the interstate system of that segment of state route No. 90 between the south Bellevue interchange and the Connecticut street interchange on state route No. 5 and the substitution of public mass transit projects in lieu thereof as authorized by section 103(e)(4) of Title 23, United States Code, is directed to complete all phases of the study by November 1, 1975.

2. No later than January 15, 1976, the city councils of Seattle, Mercer Island and Bellevue and the county council of King County shall each by resolution either approve or disapprove a request to withdraw from the interstate system the segment of state route No. 90 between south Bellevue interchange and the Connecticut street interchange on state route No. 5. Nothing in this subsection shall be construed as requiring the city or county councils to adopt by January 15, 1976 any proposal for substitute mass transit projects.

3. If at least three of the four city and county councils request withdrawal from the interstate system of the designated segment of state route No. 90 by January 15, 1976, and such request is thereafter concurred in by the governor and the Puget Sound council of governments, such determination shall be final as it relates to the state of Washington and except as may be required to terminate the project in an orderly manner, no moneys shall thereafter be expended from the motor vehicle fund for further development of the designated section of highway as an interstate highway without further express authorization of the legislature.

4. If fewer than three of the four city and county councils request withdrawal from the interstate system of the designated segment of state route No. 90 by January 15, 1976, or if the governor does not concur in the withdrawal request, then no tax revenues collected by the state of Washington shall thereafter be expended for the construction of substitute public mass transit projects in the Seattle metropolitan area pursuant to section 103(e)(4) of Title 23, United States Code, without further express authorization of the legislature.

\[ [1975 1st ex.s. c 272 § 2](http://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1975ex1c272.pdf?cite=1975%201st%20ex.s.%20c%20272%20§%202); \]

## 47.20.653 - Interstate 90 corridor—Court proceedings, priority.
State court proceedings instituted to challenge the validity of any steps taken in pursuance of the construction of the segment of the interstate system between south Bellevue and state route No. 5 in Seattle, or the construction of substitute public mass transit projects in lieu thereof, shall take precedence over all other causes not involving the public interest in all courts of this state to the end construction of such facilities may be expedited to the fullest. The legislature of the state of Washington respectfully requests of the federal judiciary that challenges instituted in the federal courts relating to the validity of steps leading to the construction of the designated interstate highway or substitute public mass transit projects in lieu thereof be expedited to the fullest.

\[ [1975 1st ex.s. c 272 § 5](http://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1975ex1c272.pdf?cite=1975%201st%20ex.s.%20c%20272%20§%205); \]

## 47.20.700 - State route No. 504 (Spirit Lake Memorial Highway)—Extension and parking facilities.
The department of transportation may provide for the construction of an extension of state route number 504 from the vicinity of Maple Flats to the vicinity of the United States Corps of Engineers debris dam on the north fork of the Toutle river on an alignment to be approved by the department of transportation. The department may enter into an agreement with the principal owner of the necessary right-of-way providing as follows:

1. The owner of the right-of-way shall construct the highway extension and public parking facilities as specified by the department of transportation.

2. The owner of the right-of-way shall convey to the state, right-of-way for the highway extension a minimum of one hundred fifty feet in width (except right-of-way presently under the control of the department of natural resources), together with areas for public parking facilities as designated by the department of transportation.

3. The department of transportation shall reimburse the present owner of the right-of-way for the actual cost of construction of the highway extension and the public parking facilities.

4. The construction of the highway extension and public parking facilities shall be completed within one year after March 27, 1982.

The department of transportation may acquire that part of the right-of-way necessary for the highway extension that is now under the control of the department of natural resources in the manner provided in RCW 47.12.023 through 47.12.029.

All expenditures by the department of transportation pursuant to this section shall be from appropriations for the construction of category A projects.

\[ [1982 c 82 § 2](http://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1982c82.pdf?cite=1982%20c%2082%20§%202); \]

## 47.20.710 - Quinault Tribal Highway—Agreement authorized—Route.
The department of transportation is authorized to enter into a cooperative agreement with the governing authority for the Indian peoples of the Quinault Indian Reservation and appropriate agencies of the United States for the location, design, right-of-way acquisition, construction, and maintenance of a highway beginning at the south boundary of the Quinault Indian reservation on state route number 109, thence northerly along the present right-of-way of state route number 109 to the township line, thence inland and northerly across the Raft river to an intersection with state route number 101 south of Queets. The highway shall be known as the "Tribal Highway" and may also be designated by the department as state route number 109. It is anticipated that this highway construction will be funded from federal sources other than normal federal aid highway allocations.

\[ [1985 c 228 § 1](http://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1985c228.pdf?cite=1985%20c%20228%20§%201); \]

## 47.20.715 - Quinault Tribal Highway—Maintenance, operation, improvements—Intersections, access.
As a part of the agreement, the department may assume responsibility for the operation and maintenance and future improvement of the highway. The agreement may also reserve to the governing authority for the Indian peoples of the Quinault Indian Reservation authority to construct public road intersections or grade separation crossings of the highway. Existing rights of access from adjoining property to existing state route number 109 from the south reservation boundary to the township line shall not be affected by RCW 47.20.710 through 47.20.735 or the agreement authorized by RCW 47.20.710.

\[ [1985 c 228 § 2](http://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1985c228.pdf?cite=1985%20c%20228%20§%202); \]

## 47.20.720 - Quinault Tribal Highway—Certain portion as limited access.
The department is authorized to determine the location of the highway from the township line to a junction with state route number 101 after consultations with the governing authority for the Indian peoples of the Quinault Indian Reservation and the bureau of Indian affairs. The department may then proceed with the establishment of this section of the highway as a limited access facility in the manner prescribed in RCW 47.52.131 through 47.52.137 and 47.52.195 (and the administrative rules adopted by the department to implement those sections), subject, however, to the following conditions: (1) The access report required by RCW 47.52.131 shall be approved by the governing authority for the Indian peoples of the Quinault Indian Reservation before public hearings; and (2) the final limited access plan adopted pursuant to RCW 47.52.137 at the conclusion of the public hearing, or after any appeal from it has been decided, shall be approved by the governing authority for the Indian peoples of the Quinault Indian Reservation and the bureau of Indian affairs before right-of-way is acquired for this section of highway.

\[ [1985 c 228 § 3](http://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1985c228.pdf?cite=1985%20c%20228%20§%203); \]

## 47.20.725 - Quinault Tribal Highway—Acquisition of remaining right-of-way.
The department is authorized to acquire the remaining right-of-way for the Tribal Highway by purchase or by condemnation under state or federal eminent domain statutes. The secretary of transportation pursuant to the agreement is authorized to convey by deed to the governing authority for the Indian peoples of the Quinault Indian Reservation the right-of-way to the entire highway when fully acquired in return for a conveyance by the governing authority for the Indian peoples of the Quinault Indian Reservation to the state of Washington of a perpetual easement for public travel on the through lanes and shoulders of the highway when constructed. The agreement may also authorize the governing authority for the Indian peoples of the Quinault Indian Reservation to convey to the United States an easement to construct, maintain, and repair the highway improvements if such an easement is required by regulations of the bureau of Indian affairs.

\[ [1985 c 228 § 4](http://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1985c228.pdf?cite=1985%20c%20228%20§%204); \]

## 47.20.730 - Quinault Tribal Highway—Department as agent.
Except as otherwise provided by RCW 47.20.710 through 47.20.735 or by the agreement authorized by RCW 47.20.710, the department may proceed with the location, design, acquisition of right-of-way, construction, and maintenance of the highway as an agent of the governing authority for the Indian peoples of the Quinault Indian Reservation in accordance with applicable state or federal law.

\[ [1985 c 228 § 5](http://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1985c228.pdf?cite=1985%20c%20228%20§%205); \]

## 47.20.735 - Quinault Tribal Highway—Authority to seek federal funding.
The department is authorized to join with the governing authority for the Indian peoples of the Quinault Indian Reservation to seek federal funding for the construction of the Tribal Highway.

\[ [1985 c 228 § 6](http://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1985c228.pdf?cite=1985%20c%20228%20§%206); \]

## 47.20.780 - Design-build—Competitive bidding.
The department of transportation shall develop a process for awarding competitively bid highway construction contracts for projects over two million dollars that may be constructed using a design-build procedure. As used in this section and RCW 47.20.785, "design-build procedure" means a method of contracting under which the department of transportation contracts with another party for the party to both design and build the structures, facilities, and other items specified in the contract.

The process developed by the department must, at a minimum, include the scope of services required under the design-build procedure, contractor prequalification requirements, criteria for evaluating technical information and project costs, contractor selection criteria, and issue resolution procedures.

\[ [2015 3rd sp.s. c 18 § 1](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/2015-16/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/Senate/5997-S.SL.pdf?cite=2015%203rd%20sp.s.%20c%2018%20§%201); [2007 c 152 § 1](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/2007-08/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/Senate/5798.SL.pdf?cite=2007%20c%20152%20§%201); [2001 c 226 § 2](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/2001-02/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/House/1680-S.SL.pdf?cite=2001%20c%20226%20§%202); \]

## 47.20.785 - Design-build—Qualified projects.
The department of transportation is authorized and strongly encouraged to use the design-build procedure for public works projects over two million dollars when:

1. The construction activities are highly specialized and a design-build approach is critical in developing the construction methodology; or

2. The projects selected provide opportunity for greater innovation and efficiencies between the designer and the builder; or

3. Significant savings in project delivery time would be realized.

\[ [2015 3rd sp.s. c 18 § 2](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/2015-16/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/Senate/5997-S.SL.pdf?cite=2015%203rd%20sp.s.%20c%2018%20§%202); [2006 c 37 § 1](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/2005-06/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/House/2874.SL.pdf?cite=2006%20c%2037%20§%201); [2001 c 226 § 3](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/2001-02/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/House/1680-S.SL.pdf?cite=2001%20c%20226%20§%203); \]

## 47.20.900 - Severability—1975 1st ex.s. c 272.
If any provision of this act, or its application to any person or circumstance is held invalid, the remainder of the act, or the application of the provision to other persons or circumstances is not affected.

\[ [1975 1st ex.s. c 272 § 6](http://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1975ex1c272.pdf?cite=1975%201st%20ex.s.%20c%20272%20§%206); \]

