# 66.12 - Exemptions.
* [66.12.010 - Wine or beer manufactured for home use.](#6612010---wine-or-beer-manufactured-for-home-use)
* [66.12.030 - Licensed manufacturers not prevented from storing liquor—Transshipment in interstate, foreign commerce—Interstate, foreign transactions protected.](#6612030---licensed-manufacturers-not-prevented-from-storing-liquortransshipment-in-interstate-foreign-commerceinterstate-foreign-transactions-protected)
* [66.12.060 - Pharmaceutical preparations, patent medicines, denatured alcohol.](#6612060---pharmaceutical-preparations-patent-medicines-denatured-alcohol)
* [66.12.070 - Medicinal, culinary, and toilet preparations not usable as beverages—Sample and analysis—Clearly labeled.](#6612070---medicinal-culinary-and-toilet-preparations-not-usable-as-beveragessample-and-analysisclearly-labeled)
* [66.12.110 - Duty-free alcoholic beverages for personal use.](#6612110---duty-free-alcoholic-beverages-for-personal-use)
* [66.12.120 - Bringing alcoholic beverages into state from another state—Payment of markup and tax.](#6612120---bringing-alcoholic-beverages-into-state-from-another-statepayment-of-markup-and-tax)
* [66.12.125 - Alcohol for use as fuel—Legislative finding and declaration.](#6612125---alcohol-for-use-as-fuellegislative-finding-and-declaration)
* [66.12.130 - Alcohol for use as fuel in motor vehicles, farm implements, machines, etc., or in combination with other petroleum products for use as fuel.](#6612130---alcohol-for-use-as-fuel-in-motor-vehicles-farm-implements-machines-etc-or-in-combination-with-other-petroleum-products-for-use-as-fuel)
* [66.12.140 - Use of alcoholic beverages in culinary, restaurant, or food fermentation courses.](#6612140---use-of-alcoholic-beverages-in-culinary-restaurant-or-food-fermentation-courses)
* [66.12.145 - Persons engaged in medical or dental pursuits—Persons engaged in mechanical, manufacturing, or scientific pursuits.](#6612145---persons-engaged-in-medical-or-dental-pursuitspersons-engaged-in-mechanical-manufacturing-or-scientific-pursuits)
* [66.12.150 - Beer or wine offered by hospital or nursing home for consumption on the premises.](#6612150---beer-or-wine-offered-by-hospital-or-nursing-home-for-consumption-on-the-premises)
* [66.12.160 - Manufacture or sale of confections or food containing liquor.](#6612160---manufacture-or-sale-of-confections-or-food-containing-liquor)
* [66.12.170 - Obtaining liquor for manufacturing confections or food products.](#6612170---obtaining-liquor-for-manufacturing-confections-or-food-products)
* [66.12.180 - Wine commission—Wine donations—Promotional activities.](#6612180---wine-commissionwine-donationspromotional-activities)
* [66.12.185 - Beer commission—Beer or malt donations—Promotional activities.](#6612185---beer-commissionbeer-or-malt-donationspromotional-activities)
* [66.12.195 - Legislative gift center—Selling wine for off-premises consumption.](#6612195---legislative-gift-centerselling-wine-for-off-premises-consumption)
* [66.12.230 - Washington grain commission.](#6612230---washington-grain-commission)
* [66.12.240 - Wedding boutiques and art galleries.](#6612240---wedding-boutiques-and-art-galleries)
## 66.12.010 - Wine or beer manufactured for home use.
Nothing in this title, other than RCW 66.28.140, applies to wine or beer manufactured in any home for private consumption, and not for sale.

\[ [2009 c 360 § 1](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/2009-10/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/Senate/5060.SL.pdf?cite=2009%20c%20360%20§%201); [1981 c 255 § 1](http://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1981c255.pdf?cite=1981%20c%20255%20§%201); [1955 c 39 § 1](http://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1955c39.pdf?cite=1955%20c%2039%20§%201); [1933 ex.s. c 62 § 32](http://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1933ex1c62.pdf?cite=1933%20ex.s.%20c%2062%20§%2032); RRS § 7306-32; \]

## 66.12.030 - Licensed manufacturers not prevented from storing liquor—Transshipment in interstate, foreign commerce—Interstate, foreign transactions protected.
1. Nothing in this title shall prevent any person licensed to manufacture liquor from keeping liquor in his or her warehouse or place of business.

2. Nothing in this title shall prevent the transshipment of liquor in interstate and foreign commerce; but no person shall import liquor into the state from any other state or country, except, as herein otherwise provided, for use or sale in the state, except the board.

3. Every provision of this title which may affect transactions in liquor between a person in this state and a person in another state or in a foreign country shall be construed to affect such transactions so far only as the legislature has power to make laws in relation thereto.

\[ [2012 c 117 § 270](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/2011-12/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/Senate/6095.SL.pdf?cite=2012%20c%20117%20§%20270); [1933 ex.s. c 62 § 49](http://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1933ex1c62.pdf?cite=1933%20ex.s.%20c%2062%20§%2049); RRS § 7306-49; \]

## 66.12.060 - Pharmaceutical preparations, patent medicines, denatured alcohol.
Nothing in this title shall apply to or prevent the sale, purchase or consumption

1. of any pharmaceutical preparation containing liquor which is prepared by a druggist according to a formula of the pharmacopoeia of the United States, or the dispensatory of the United States; or

2. of any proprietary or patent medicine; or

3. of wood alcohol or denatured alcohol, except in the case of the sale, purchase, or consumption of wood alcohol or denatured alcohol for beverage purposes, either alone or combined with any other liquid or substance.

\[ [1933 ex.s. c 62 § 50](http://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1933ex1c62.pdf?cite=1933%20ex.s.%20c%2062%20§%2050); RRS § 7306-50; \]

## 66.12.070 - Medicinal, culinary, and toilet preparations not usable as beverages—Sample and analysis—Clearly labeled.
1. Where a medicinal preparation contains liquor as one of the necessary ingredients thereof, and also contains sufficient medication to prevent its use as an alcoholic beverage, nothing in this title shall apply to or prevent its composition or sale by a druggist when compounded from liquor purchased by the druggist under a special permit held by him or her, nor apply to or prevent the purchase or consumption of the preparation by any person for strictly medicinal purposes.

2. Where a toilet or culinary preparation, that is to say, any perfume, lotion, or flavoring extract or essence, or dietary supplement as defined by the federal food and drug administration, contains liquor and also contains sufficient ingredient or medication to prevent its use as a beverage, nothing in this title shall apply to or prevent the sale or purchase of that preparation by any druggist or other person who manufactures or deals in the preparation, nor apply to or prevent the purchase or consumption of the preparation by any person who purchases or consumes it for any toilet or culinary purpose.

3. In order to determine whether any particular medicinal, toilet, dietary supplement, or culinary preparation referred to in this section contains sufficient ingredient or medication to prevent its use as an alcoholic beverage, the board may cause a sample of the preparation, purchased or obtained from any person whomsoever, to be analyzed by an analyst appointed or designated by the board; and if it appears from a certificate signed by the analyst that he or she finds the sample so analyzed by him or her did not contain sufficient ingredient or medication to prevent its use as an alcoholic beverage, the certificate shall be conclusive evidence that the preparation, the sample of which was so analyzed, is not a preparation the sale or purchase of which is permitted by this section.

4. Dietary supplements that contain more than one-half of one percent alcohol which are prepared and sold under this section shall be clearly labeled and the ingredients listed on the label in accordance with the provisions of the federal food, drug, and cosmetics act (21 U.S.C. Sec. 321) as now or hereafter amended.

\[ [2012 c 117 § 271](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/2011-12/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/Senate/6095.SL.pdf?cite=2012%20c%20117%20§%20271); [1999 c 88 § 1](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/1999-00/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/Senate/5365.SL.pdf?cite=1999%20c%2088%20§%201); [1933 ex.s. c 62 § 51](http://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1933ex1c62.pdf?cite=1933%20ex.s.%20c%2062%20§%2051); RRS § 7306-51; \]

## 66.12.110 - Duty-free alcoholic beverages for personal use.
A person twenty-one years of age or over may bring into the state from without the United States, free of tax and markup, for his or her personal or household use such alcoholic beverages as have been declared and permitted to enter the United States duty free under federal law.

Such entry of alcoholic beverages in excess of that herein provided may be authorized by the board upon payment of an equivalent tax as would be applicable to the purchase of the same or similar liquor at retail in this state. The board must adopt appropriate regulations pursuant to chapter 34.05 RCW for the purpose of carrying out the provisions of this section. The board may issue a spirits, beer, and wine private club license to a charitable or nonprofit corporation of the state of Washington, the majority of the officers and directors of which are United States citizens and the minority of the officers and directors of which are citizens of the Dominion of Canada, and where the location of the premises for such spirits, beer, and wine private club license is not more than ten miles south of the border between the United States and the province of British Columbia.

\[ [2016 c 235 § 3](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/2015-16/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/Senate/6470-S.SL.pdf?cite=2016%20c%20235%20§%203); [2012 c 117 § 272](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/2011-12/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/Senate/6095.SL.pdf?cite=2012%20c%20117%20§%20272); [1999 c 281 § 3](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/1999-00/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/Senate/5364-S.SL.pdf?cite=1999%20c%20281%20§%203); 1975-'76 2nd ex.s. c 20 § 1; [1975 1st ex.s. c 256 § 1](http://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1975ex1c256.pdf?cite=1975%201st%20ex.s.%20c%20256%20§%201); [1975 1st ex.s. c 173 § 2](http://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1975ex1c173.pdf?cite=1975%201st%20ex.s.%20c%20173%20§%202); [1967 c 38 § 1](http://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1967c38.pdf?cite=1967%20c%2038%20§%201); \]

## 66.12.120 - Bringing alcoholic beverages into state from another state—Payment of markup and tax.
Notwithstanding any other provision of this title, a person twenty-one years of age or over may, free of tax, for personal or household use, bring into the state of Washington from another state no more than once per calendar month up to two liters of spirits or wine or two hundred eighty-eight ounces of beer. Additionally, such person may be authorized by the board to bring into the state of Washington from another state a reasonable amount of alcoholic beverages in excess of that provided in this section for personal or household use only upon payment of an equivalent tax as would be applicable to the purchase of the same or similar liquor at retail in this state. The board must adopt appropriate regulations pursuant to chapter 34.05 RCW for the purpose of carrying into effect the provisions of this section.

\[ [2016 c 235 § 4](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/2015-16/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/Senate/6470-S.SL.pdf?cite=2016%20c%20235%20§%204); [1995 c 100 § 1](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/1995-96/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/House/1059.SL.pdf?cite=1995%20c%20100%20§%201); [1975 1st ex.s. c 173 § 3](http://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1975ex1c173.pdf?cite=1975%201st%20ex.s.%20c%20173%20§%203); \]

## 66.12.125 - Alcohol for use as fuel—Legislative finding and declaration.
The legislature finds that the production of alcohol for use as a fuel or fuel supplement is of great importance to the state. Alcohol, when used as a fuel source, is less polluting to the atmosphere than conventional fuels and its use reduces the state's dependence on limited oil resources. Production of alcohol for use as a fuel provides a new use and market for Washington agricultural products and aids Washington farmers in producing food and fiber for the citizens of the state, nation, and world. Therefore, the legislature declares public policy to be one of encouragement toward the production and use of alcohol as a fuel or fuel supplement.

\[ [1980 c 140 § 1](http://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1980c140.pdf?cite=1980%20c%20140%20§%201); \]

## 66.12.130 - Alcohol for use as fuel in motor vehicles, farm implements, machines, etc., or in combination with other petroleum products for use as fuel.
Nothing in this title shall apply to or prevent the sale, importation, purchase, production, or blending of alcohol used solely for fuel to be used in motor vehicles, farm implements, and machines or implements of husbandry or in combination with gasoline or other petroleum products for use as such fuel. Manufacturers and distillers of such alcohol fuel are not required to obtain a license under this title. Alcohol which is produced for use as fuel shall be denatured in accordance with a formula approved by the federal bureau of alcohol, tobacco and firearms prior to the removal of the alcohol from the premises as described in the approved federal permit application: PROVIDED, That alcohol which is being transferred between plants involved in the distillation or manufacture of alcohol fuel need not be denatured if it is transferred in accordance with federal bureau of alcohol, tobacco and firearms regulation 27 C.F.R. 19.996 as existing on July 26, 1981. The exemptions from the state liquor control laws provided by this section only apply to distillers and manufacturers of alcohol to be used solely for fuel as long as the manufacturers and distillers are the holders of an appropriate permit issued under federal law.

\[ [1981 c 179 § 1](http://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1981c179.pdf?cite=1981%20c%20179%20§%201); [1980 c 140 § 2](http://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1980c140.pdf?cite=1980%20c%20140%20§%202); \]

## 66.12.140 - Use of alcoholic beverages in culinary, restaurant, or food fermentation courses.
1. Nothing in this title shall prevent the use of beer, wine, and/or spirituous liquor, for cooking purposes only, in conjunction with a culinary or restaurant course offered by a college, university, community college, area vocational technical institute, or private vocational school. Further, nothing in this title shall prohibit the making of beer or wine in food fermentation courses offered by a college, university, community college, area vocational technical institute, or private vocational school.

2. "Culinary or restaurant course" as used in this section means a course of instruction which includes practical experience in food preparation under the supervision of an instructor who is twenty-one years of age or older.

3. Persons under twenty-one years of age participating in culinary or restaurant courses may handle beer, wine, or spirituous liquor for purposes of participating in the courses, but nothing in this section shall be construed to authorize consumption of liquor by persons under twenty-one years of age or to authorize possession of liquor by persons under twenty-one years of age at any time or place other than while preparing food under the supervision of the course instructor.

4. Beer, wine, and/or spirituous liquor to be used in culinary or restaurant courses shall be purchased at retail from the board or a retailer licensed under this title. All such liquor shall be securely stored in the food preparation area and shall not be displayed in an area open to the general public.

5. Colleges, universities, community colleges, area vocational technical institutes, and private vocational schools shall obtain the prior written approval of the board for use of beer, wine, and/or spirituous liquor for cooking purposes in their culinary or restaurant courses.

\[ [1982 c 85 § 8](http://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1982c85.pdf?cite=1982%20c%2085%20§%208); \]

## 66.12.145 - Persons engaged in medical or dental pursuits—Persons engaged in mechanical, manufacturing, or scientific pursuits.
1. Any person engaged in medical or dental pursuits, any person in charge of an institution regularly conducted as a hospital or sanitarium for the care of persons in ill health, or a home devoted exclusively to the care of aged persons, may obtain alcohol in a nonbeverage form directly from a supplier under a permit issued under RCW 66.20.010(1).

2. Any person engaged in the mechanical or manufacturing business or in scientific pursuits requiring the use of alcohol may obtain alcohol in a nonbeverage form directly from a supplier under a permit issued under RCW 66.20.010(2).

\[ [2008 c 64 § 1](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/2007-08/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/House/2825.SL.pdf?cite=2008%20c%2064%20§%201); \]

## 66.12.150 - Beer or wine offered by hospital or nursing home for consumption on the premises.
Nothing in this title shall apply to or prevent a hospital, as defined in *RCW 70.39.020, or a nursing home as defined in RCW 18.51.010, from offering or supplying without charge beer or wine by the individual glass to any patient, member of a patient's family, or patient visitor, for consumption on the premises: PROVIDED, That such patient, family member, or visitor shall be at least twenty-one years of age, and that the beer or wine shall be purchased under this title.

\[ [1982 c 85 § 9](http://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1982c85.pdf?cite=1982%20c%2085%20§%209); \]

## 66.12.160 - Manufacture or sale of confections or food containing liquor.
Nothing in this title shall apply to or prevent the manufacture or sale of confections or food products containing alcohol or liquor if: (1) The confection or food product does not contain more than one percent of alcohol by weight; and (2) the confection or food product has a label stating: "This product contains liquor and the alcohol content is one percent or less of the weight of the product." Manufacturers of confections or food products are not required to obtain a license under this title.

\[ [1984 c 78 § 3](http://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1984c78.pdf?cite=1984%20c%2078%20§%203); \]

## 66.12.170 - Obtaining liquor for manufacturing confections or food products.
Nothing in this title shall be construed as limiting the right of any manufacturer of confections or food products from obtaining liquor from any source whatsoever if: (1) It is acquired pursuant to a permit issued under RCW 66.20.010(5); and (2) the applicable taxes imposed by this title are paid.

\[ [1984 c 78 § 4](http://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1984c78.pdf?cite=1984%20c%2078%20§%204); \]

## 66.12.180 - Wine commission—Wine donations—Promotional activities.
The Washington wine commission created under RCW 15.88.030 may purchase or receive donations of wine from wineries and may use such wine for promotional purposes. Wine furnished to the commission under this section which is used within the state is subject to the taxes imposed under RCW 66.24.210. No license, permit, or bond is required of the Washington wine commission under this title for promotional activities conducted under chapter 15.88 RCW.

\[ [1993 c 160 § 1](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/1993-94/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/House/1063-S.SL.pdf?cite=1993%20c%20160%20§%201); [1987 c 452 § 14](http://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1987c452.pdf?cite=1987%20c%20452%20§%2014); \]

## 66.12.185 - Beer commission—Beer or malt donations—Promotional activities.
The Washington beer commission created under RCW 15.89.030 may purchase or receive donations of beer or malt beverages from any brewery, in any state, or in any country and may use such beer or malt beverages for any promotional purposes as outlined in RCW 15.89.070. Beer and malt beverages that are furnished to the commission under this section that are used within the state are subject to the taxes imposed under RCW 66.24.290. No license, permit, or bond is required of the Washington beer commission under this title for promotional activities conducted under chapter 15.89 RCW.

\[ [2006 c 330 § 23](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/2005-06/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/Senate/6661.SL.pdf?cite=2006%20c%20330%20§%2023); \]

## 66.12.195 - Legislative gift center—Selling wine for off-premises consumption.
Nothing in this title shall apply to or prevent the legislative gift center created in chapter 44.73 RCW from selling at retail for off-premises consumption wine produced in Washington by a licensed domestic winery.

\[ [2009 c 228 § 2](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/2009-10/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/House/1415-S.SL.pdf?cite=2009%20c%20228%20§%202); \]

## 66.12.230 - Washington grain commission.
The Washington grain commission created under RCW 15.115.040 may purchase or receive donations of liquor produced from wheat or barley grown in Washington and may use the liquor for the promotional purposes specified in RCW 15.115.170(2). Liquor furnished to the commission under this section which is used within the state is subject to the taxes imposed under RCW 66.24.210. A license, permit, or bond is not required of the Washington grain commission under this title for the promotional purposes specified in RCW 15.115.170(2).

\[ [2009 c 33 § 18](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/2009-10/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/House/1254-S.SL.pdf?cite=2009%20c%2033%20§%2018); \]

## 66.12.240 - Wedding boutiques and art galleries.
1. Nothing in this title applies to or prevents a wedding boutique or art gallery from offering or supplying without charge wine or beer by the individual glass to a customer for consumption on the premises. However, the customer must be at least twenty-one years of age and may only be offered one glass of wine or beer, and wine or beer served or consumed must be purchased from a Washington state licensed retailer at full retail price. A wedding boutique or art gallery offering wine or beer without charge may not advertise the service of complimentary wine or beer and may not sell wine or beer in any manner. Any employee involved in the service of wine or beer must complete a board-approved limited alcohol server training program.

2. The definitions in this subsection apply throughout this section unless the context clearly requires otherwise.

    a. "Art gallery" means a room or building devoted to the exhibition and/or sale of the works of art.

    b. "Wedding boutique" means a business primarily engaged in the sale of wedding merchandise.

\[ [2016 c 235 § 5](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/2015-16/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/Senate/6470-S.SL.pdf?cite=2016%20c%20235%20§%205); [2009 c 361 § 1](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/2009-10/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/Senate/5110-S.SL.pdf?cite=2009%20c%20361%20§%201); \]

