# 18.64 - Pharmacists.
* [18.64.001 - Pharmacy quality assurance commission—Creation—Membership—Oath—Vacancies.](#1864001---pharmacy-quality-assurance-commissioncreationmembershipoathvacancies)
* [18.64.003 - Commission—Meetings—Chairperson—Compensation and travel expenses.](#1864003---commissionmeetingschairpersoncompensation-and-travel-expenses)
* [18.64.005 - Commission—Powers and duties.](#1864005---commissionpowers-and-duties)
* [18.64.008 - Commission—Contraceptive availability awareness.](#1864008---commissioncontraceptive-availability-awareness)
* [18.64.009 - Department of health—Enforcement employees declared to be peace officers—Authority.](#1864009---department-of-healthenforcement-employees-declared-to-be-peace-officersauthority)
* [18.64.011 - Definitions.](#1864011---definitions)
* [18.64.020 - Licensing required.](#1864020---licensing-required)
* [18.64.040 - Examination fee.](#1864040---examination-fee)
* [18.64.043 - Pharmacy license—Fee—Display—Declaration of ownership and location—Penalties.](#1864043---pharmacy-licensefeedisplaydeclaration-of-ownership-and-locationpenalties)
* [18.64.044 - Shopkeeper's registration—Penalty—Ephedrine/pseudoephedrine/phenylpropanolamine.](#1864044---shopkeepers-registrationpenaltyephedrinepseudoephedrinephenylpropanolamine)
* [18.64.045 - Manufacturer's license—Fees—Display—Declaration of ownership and location—Penalties.](#1864045---manufacturers-licensefeesdisplaydeclaration-of-ownership-and-locationpenalties)
* [18.64.046 - Wholesaler's license—Required—Authority of licensee—Penalty—Ephedrine/pseudoephedrine/phenylpropanolamine.](#1864046---wholesalers-licenserequiredauthority-of-licenseepenaltyephedrinepseudoephedrinephenylpropanolamine)
* [18.64.047 - Itinerant vendor's or peddler's registration—Fee—Penalties—Ephedrine/pseudoephedrine/phenylpropanolamine.](#1864047---itinerant-vendors-or-peddlers-registrationfeepenaltiesephedrinepseudoephedrinephenylpropanolamine)
* [18.64.050 - Duplicate for lost or destroyed license or certificate—Certified documents—Fees.](#1864050---duplicate-for-lost-or-destroyed-license-or-certificatecertified-documentsfees)
* [18.64.080 - Licensing of pharmacists—Registration of interns—Prerequisites—Examinations—Reciprocity—Fees—Renewal.](#1864080---licensing-of-pharmacistsregistration-of-internsprerequisitesexaminationsreciprocityfeesrenewal)
* [18.64.140 - License—Fees—Display—Inactive license.](#1864140---licensefeesdisplayinactive-license)
* [18.64.160 - Disciplinary action against pharmacist's and intern's licenses—Grounds.](#1864160---disciplinary-action-against-pharmacists-and-interns-licensesgrounds)
* [18.64.163 - Uniform Disciplinary Act.](#1864163---uniform-disciplinary-act)
* [18.64.165 - Refusal, suspension, and revocation of other licenses.](#1864165---refusal-suspension-and-revocation-of-other-licenses)
* [18.64.200 - Refusal, suspension, and revocation of other licenses—Appeal procedure.](#1864200---refusal-suspension-and-revocation-of-other-licensesappeal-procedure)
* [18.64.205 - Retired active license status.](#1864205---retired-active-license-status)
* [18.64.245 - Prescription records—Digital or electronic form—Penalty.](#1864245---prescription-recordsdigital-or-electronic-formpenalty)
* [18.64.246 - Prescriptions—Labels—Cover or cap to meet safety standards—Penalty.](#1864246---prescriptionslabelscover-or-cap-to-meet-safety-standardspenalty)
* [18.64.250 - Unlawful practices—Penalty for violations—Exceptions.](#1864250---unlawful-practicespenalty-for-violationsexceptions)
* [18.64.253 - Students practicing pharmacy—Rules.](#1864253---students-practicing-pharmacyrules)
* [18.64.255 - Authorized practices.](#1864255---authorized-practices)
* [18.64.257 - Prescription of legend drugs by dialysis programs.](#1864257---prescription-of-legend-drugs-by-dialysis-programs)
* [18.64.265 - Schedule II controlled substance—Partial fill permitted.](#1864265---schedule-ii-controlled-substancepartial-fill-permitted)
* [18.64.270 - Responsibility for drug purity—Compounding—Adulteration—Penalty.](#1864270---responsibility-for-drug-puritycompoundingadulterationpenalty)
* [18.64.275 - Limitations on liability for dispensing of prescription.](#1864275---limitations-on-liability-for-dispensing-of-prescription)
* [18.64.280 - General penalty.](#1864280---general-penalty)
* [18.64.310 - Department of health—Powers and duties.](#1864310---department-of-healthpowers-and-duties)
* [18.64.350 - Nonresident pharmacies—Findings.](#1864350---nonresident-pharmaciesfindings)
* [18.64.360 - Nonresident pharmacies—Definition—Requirements—Exemption—Reciprocity with Canadian pharmacies.](#1864360---nonresident-pharmaciesdefinitionrequirementsexemptionreciprocity-with-canadian-pharmacies)
* [18.64.370 - Nonresident pharmacies—License required—Application—Renewal.](#1864370---nonresident-pharmacieslicense-requiredapplicationrenewal)
* [18.64.380 - Nonresident pharmacies—Information required—Inspection.](#1864380---nonresident-pharmaciesinformation-requiredinspection)
* [18.64.390 - Nonresident pharmacies—Violations—Penalties.](#1864390---nonresident-pharmaciesviolationspenalties)
* [18.64.400 - Nonresident pharmacies—Definition—Advertising.](#1864400---nonresident-pharmaciesdefinitionadvertising)
* [18.64.410 - Nonresident pharmacies—Rules.](#1864410---nonresident-pharmaciesrules)
* [18.64.420 - Nonresident pharmacies—Information confidential—Exceptions.](#1864420---nonresident-pharmaciesinformation-confidentialexceptions)
* [18.64.430 - Cost disclosure to health care providers.](#1864430---cost-disclosure-to-health-care-providers)
* [18.64.450 - Health care entity—License requirements for legend drugs and controlled substances—Exception.](#1864450---health-care-entitylicense-requirements-for-legend-drugs-and-controlled-substancesexception)
* [18.64.460 - Health care entity—License fee—Requirements—Penalty.](#1864460---health-care-entitylicense-feerequirementspenalty)
* [18.64.470 - Health care entity—Records.](#1864470---health-care-entityrecords)
* [18.64.480 - Waiver request to allow importation of prescription drugs from Canada.](#1864480---waiver-request-to-allow-importation-of-prescription-drugs-from-canada)
* [18.64.490 - Waiver request to authorize the state to license Canadian, United Kingdom, Irish, and other nondomestic prescription drug wholesalers under RCW  18.64.046—Implementation—Rules.](#1864490---waiver-request-to-authorize-the-state-to-license-canadian-united-kingdom-irish-and-other-nondomestic-prescription-drug-wholesalers-under-rcw--1864046implementationrules)
* [18.64.500 - Tamper-resistant prescription pads or paper.](#1864500---tamper-resistant-prescription-pads-or-paper)
* [18.64.510 - Limitation on authority to regulate or establish standards regarding a jail.](#1864510---limitation-on-authority-to-regulate-or-establish-standards-regarding-a-jail)
* [18.64.520 - Dispensing of drug other than controlled substance—Supply limit.](#1864520---dispensing-of-drug-other-than-controlled-substancesupply-limit)
* [18.64.530 - Topical ophthalmic products—Early refills authorized.](#1864530---topical-ophthalmic-productsearly-refills-authorized)
* [18.64.540 - Provision of drugs to ambulance or aid services associated with providing emergency medical services to patients.](#1864540---provision-of-drugs-to-ambulance-or-aid-services-associated-with-providing-emergency-medical-services-to-patients)
* [18.64.550 - Chart order as prescription—Long-term care facilities and hospice programs.](#1864550---chart-order-as-prescriptionlong-term-care-facilities-and-hospice-programs)
* [18.64.560 - Nursing homes and hospice programs—Emergency drug kits—Supplemental dose kits.](#1864560---nursing-homes-and-hospice-programsemergency-drug-kitssupplemental-dose-kits)
* [18.64.570 - Long-term care facilities and hospice programs—Legend drug resupply—Shared pharmacy services—Unused drugs.](#1864570---long-term-care-facilities-and-hospice-programslegend-drug-resupplyshared-pharmacy-servicesunused-drugs)
* [18.64.580 - Long-term care pharmacies—Ratio of pharmacists to pharmacy technicians—Standards.](#1864580---long-term-care-pharmaciesratio-of-pharmacists-to-pharmacy-techniciansstandards)
* [18.64.590 - Long-term care facilities and hospice programs—Commission authority.](#1864590---long-term-care-facilities-and-hospice-programscommission-authority)
* [18.64.600 - Opioid use disorder medications—Remote dispensing sites—Registration—Rules—Fees.](#1864600---opioid-use-disorder-medicationsremote-dispensing-sitesregistrationrulesfees)
* [18.64.610 - Prescription drug return and reuse—Rules.](#1864610---prescription-drug-return-and-reuserules)
* [18.64.920 - Repealer—1935 c 98.](#1864920---repealer1935-c-98)
## **18.64.001 - Pharmacy quality assurance commission—Creation—Membership—Oath—Vacancies.**
There shall be a state pharmacy quality assurance commission consisting of fifteen members, to be appointed by the governor by and with the advice and consent of the senate. Ten of the members shall be designated as pharmacist members, four of the members shall be designated a public member, and one member shall be a pharmacy technician.

Each pharmacist member shall be a  resident of this state, and at the time of his or her appointment shall have been a duly registered pharmacist under the laws of this state for a period of at least five consecutive years immediately preceding his or her appointment and shall at all times during his or her incumbency continue to be a duly licensed pharmacist: PROVIDED, That subject to the availability of qualified candidates the governor shall appoint pharmacist members representative of the areas of practice and geographically representative of the state of Washington.

The public member shall be a  resident of this state. The public member shall be appointed from the public at large, but shall not be affiliated with any aspect of pharmacy.

Members of the commission shall hold office for a term of four years, and the terms shall be staggered so that the terms of office of not more than two members will expire simultaneously on the third Monday in January of each year.

No person who has been appointed to and served for two four year terms shall be eligible for appointment to the commission.

Each member shall qualify by taking the usual oath of a state officer, which shall be filed with the secretary of state, and each member shall hold office for the term of his or her appointment and until his or her successor is appointed and qualified.

In case of the resignation or disqualification of a member, or a vacancy occurring from any cause, the governor shall appoint a successor for the unexpired term.

## **18.64.003 - Commission—Meetings—Chairperson—Compensation and travel expenses.**
Members of the commission shall meet at such places and times as it shall determine and as often as necessary to discharge the duties imposed upon it. The commission shall elect a chairperson and a vice chairperson from among its members. **A majority of the commission members appointed and serving constitutes a quorum for the transaction of commission business. The affirmative vote of a majority of a quorum of the commission is required to carry a motion or resolution, to adopt a rule, or to pass a measure. The commission is designated as a class five group for purposes of chapter 43.03 RCW.** Each member shall be compensated in accordance with RCW **43.03.265** and shall be reimbursed for travel expenses in accordance with RCW 43.03.050 and 43.03.060.

## **18.64.005 - Commission—Powers and duties.**
The commission shall:

1. Regulate the practice of pharmacy and enforce all laws placed under its jurisdiction;

2. Prepare or determine the nature of, and supervise the grading of, examinations for applicants for pharmacists' licenses;

3. Establish the qualifications for licensure of pharmacists or pharmacy interns;

4. Conduct hearings for the revocation or suspension of licenses, permits, registrations, certificates, or any other authority to practice granted by the commission, which hearings may also be conducted by an administrative law judge appointed under chapter 34.12 RCW **or a presiding officer designated by the commission. The commission may authorize the secretary, or their designee, to serve as the presiding officer for any disciplinary proceedings of the commission authorized under this chapter. The presiding officer shall not vote on or make any final decision in cases pertaining to standards of practice or where clinical expertise is necessary. All functions performed by the presiding officer shall be subject to chapter 34.05 RCW**;

5. Issue subpoenas and administer oaths in connection with any hearing, or disciplinary proceeding held under this chapter or any other chapter assigned to the commission;

6. Assist the regularly constituted enforcement agencies of this state in enforcing all laws pertaining to drugs, controlled substances, and the practice of pharmacy, or any other laws or rules under its jurisdiction;

7. Promulgate rules for the dispensing, distribution, wholesaling, and manufacturing of drugs and devices and the practice of pharmacy for the protection and promotion of the public health, safety, and welfare. Violation of any such rules shall constitute grounds for refusal, suspension, or revocation of licenses or any other authority to practice issued by the commission;

8. Adopt rules establishing and governing continuing education requirements for pharmacists and other licensees applying for renewal of licenses under this chapter;

9. Be immune, collectively and individually, from suit in any action, civil or criminal, based upon any disciplinary proceedings or other official acts performed as members of the commission. Such immunity shall apply to employees of the department when acting in the course of disciplinary proceedings;

10. Suggest strategies for preventing, reducing, and eliminating drug misuse, diversion, and abuse, including professional and public education, and treatment of persons misusing and abusing drugs;

11. Conduct or encourage educational programs to be conducted to prevent the misuse, diversion, and abuse of drugs for health care practitioners and licensed or certified health care facilities;

12. Monitor trends of drug misuse, diversion, and abuse and make periodic reports to disciplinary boards of licensed health care practitioners and education, treatment, and appropriate law enforcement agencies regarding these trends;

13. Enter into written agreements with all other state and federal agencies with any responsibility for controlling drug misuse, diversion, or abuse and with health maintenance organizations, health care service contractors, and health care providers to assist and promote coordination of agencies responsible for ensuring compliance with controlled substances laws and to monitor observance of these laws and cooperation between these agencies. The department of social and health services, the department of labor and industries, and any other state agency including licensure disciplinary boards, shall refer all apparent instances of over-prescribing by practitioners and all apparent instances of legend drug overuse to the department. The department shall also encourage such referral by health maintenance organizations, health service contractors, and health care providers.

## 18.64.008 - Commission—Contraceptive availability awareness.
To increase awareness of the availability of contraceptives in pharmacies, the pharmacy quality assurance commission shall develop a sticker or sign to be displayed on the window or door of a pharmacy that initiates or modifies drug therapy related to self-administered contraception.

\[ [2016 c 132 § 1](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/2015-16/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/House/2681-S2.SL.pdf?cite=2016%20c%20132%20§%201); \]

## 18.64.009 - Department of health—Enforcement employees declared to be peace officers—Authority.
Employees of the department, who are designated by the commission as enforcement officers, are declared to be peace officers and shall be vested with police powers to enforce chapters 18.64, 69.04, 69.36, 69.40, 69.41, and 69.50 RCW and all other laws enforced by the commission.

\[ [2013 c 19 § 6](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/2013-14/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/House/1609.SL.pdf?cite=2013%20c%2019%20§%206); [1989 1st ex.s. c 9 § 411](http://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1989ex1c9.pdf?cite=1989%201st%20ex.s.%20c%209%20§%20411); [1985 c 7 § 59](http://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1985c7.pdf?cite=1985%20c%207%20§%2059); [1979 c 90 § 4](http://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1979c90.pdf?cite=1979%20c%2090%20§%204); [1969 ex.s. c 82 § 1](http://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1969ex1c82.pdf?cite=1969%20ex.s.%20c%2082%20§%201); \]

## 18.64.011 - Definitions.
The definitions in this section apply throughout this chapter unless the context clearly requires otherwise.

1. "Administer" means the direct application of a drug or device, whether by injection, inhalation, ingestion, or any other means, to the body of a patient or research subject.

2. "Business licensing system" means the mechanism established by chapter 19.02 RCW by which business licenses, endorsed for individual state-issued licenses, are issued and renewed utilizing a business license application and a business license expiration date common to each renewable license endorsement.

3. "Chart order" means a lawful order for a drug or device entered on the chart or medical record of an inpatient or resident of an institutional facility by a practitioner or his or her designated agent.

4. "Closed door long-term care pharmacy" means a pharmacy that provides pharmaceutical care to a defined and exclusive group of patients who have access to the services of the pharmacy because they are treated by or have an affiliation with a long-term care facility or hospice program, and that is not a retailer of goods to the general public.

5. "Commission" means the pharmacy quality assurance commission.

6. "Compounding" means the act of combining two or more ingredients in the preparation of a prescription. Reconstitution and mixing of (a) sterile products according to federal food and drug administration-approved labeling does not constitute compounding if prepared pursuant to a prescription and administered immediately or in accordance with package labeling, and (b) nonsterile products according to federal food and drug administration-approved labeling does not constitute compounding if prepared pursuant to a prescription.

7. "Controlled substance" means a drug or substance, or an immediate precursor of such drug or substance, so designated under or pursuant to the provisions of chapter 69.50 RCW.

8. "Deliver" or "delivery" means the actual, constructive, or attempted transfer from one person to another of a drug or device, whether or not there is an agency relationship.

9. "Department" means the department of health.

10. "Device" means instruments, apparatus, and contrivances, including their components, parts, and accessories, intended (a) for use in the diagnosis, cure, mitigation, treatment, or prevention of disease in human beings or other animals, or (b) to affect the structure or any function of the body of human beings or other animals.

11. "Dispense" means the interpretation of a prescription or order for a drug, biological, or device and, pursuant to that prescription or order, the proper selection, measuring, compounding, labeling, or packaging necessary to prepare that prescription or order for delivery.

12. "Distribute" means the delivery of a drug or device other than by administering or dispensing.

13. "Drug" and "devices" do not include surgical or dental instruments or laboratory materials, gas and oxygen, therapy equipment, X-ray apparatus or therapeutic equipment, their component parts or accessories, or equipment, instruments, apparatus, or contrivances used to render such articles effective in medical, surgical, or dental treatment, or for use or consumption in or for mechanical, industrial, manufacturing, or scientific applications or purposes. "Drug" also does not include any article or mixture covered by the Washington pesticide control act (chapter 15.58 RCW), as enacted or hereafter amended, nor medicated feed intended for and used exclusively as a feed for animals other than human beings.

14. "Drugs" means:

    a. Articles recognized in the official United States pharmacopoeia or the official homeopathic pharmacopoeia of the United States;

    b. Substances intended for use in the diagnosis, cure, mitigation, treatment, or prevention of disease in human beings or other animals;

    c. Substances (other than food) intended to affect the structure or any function of the body of human beings or other animals; or

    d. Substances intended for use as a component of any substances specified in (a), (b), or (c) of this subsection, but not including devices or their component parts or accessories.

15. "Health care entity" means an organization that provides health care services in a setting that is not otherwise licensed by the state to acquire or possess legend drugs. Health care entity includes a freestanding outpatient surgery center, a residential treatment facility, and a freestanding cardiac care center. "Health care entity" does not include an individual practitioner's office or a multipractitioner clinic, regardless of ownership, unless the owner elects licensure as a health care entity. "Health care entity" also does not include an individual practitioner's office or multipractitioner clinic identified by a hospital on a pharmacy application or renewal pursuant to RCW 18.64.043.

16. "Hospice program" means a hospice program certified or paid by medicare under Title XVIII of the federal social security act, or a hospice program licensed under chapter 70.127 RCW.

17. "Institutional facility" means any organization whose primary purpose is to provide a physical environment for patients to obtain health care services including, but not limited to, services in a hospital, long-term care facility, hospice program, mental health facility, drug abuse treatment center, residential habilitation center, or a local, state, or federal correction facility.

18. "Labeling" means the process of preparing and affixing a label to any drug or device container. The label must include all information required by current federal and state law and pharmacy rules.

19. "Legend drugs" means any drugs which are required by any applicable federal or state law or regulation to be dispensed on prescription only or are restricted to use by practitioners only.

20. "Long-term care facility" means a nursing home licensed under chapter 18.51 RCW, an assisted living facility licensed under chapter 18.20 RCW, or an adult family home licensed under chapter 70.128 RCW.

21. "Manufacture" means the production, preparation, propagation, compounding, or processing of a drug or other substance or device or the packaging or repackaging of such substance or device, or the labeling or relabeling of the commercial container of such substance or device, but does not include the activities of a practitioner who, as an incident to his or her administration or dispensing such substance or device in the course of his or her professional practice, personally prepares, compounds, packages, or labels such substance or device. "Manufacture" includes the distribution of a licensed pharmacy compounded drug product to other state licensed persons or commercial entities for subsequent resale or distribution, unless a specific product item has approval of the commission. The term does not include:

    a. The activities of a licensed pharmacy that compounds a product on or in anticipation of an order of a licensed practitioner for use in the course of their professional practice to administer to patients, either personally or under their direct supervision;

    b. The practice of a licensed pharmacy when repackaging commercially available medication in small, reasonable quantities for a practitioner legally authorized to prescribe the medication for office use only;

    c. The distribution of a drug product that has been compounded by a licensed pharmacy to other appropriately licensed entities under common ownership or control of the facility in which the compounding takes place; or

    d. The delivery of finished and appropriately labeled compounded products dispensed pursuant to a valid prescription to alternate delivery locations, other than the patient's residence, when requested by the patient, or the prescriber to administer to the patient, or to another licensed pharmacy to dispense to the patient.

22. "Manufacturer" means a person, corporation, or other entity engaged in the manufacture of drugs or devices.

23. "Nonlegend" or "nonprescription" drugs means any drugs which may be lawfully sold without a prescription.

24. "Person" means an individual, corporation, government, governmental subdivision or agency, business trust, estate, trust, partnership or association, or any other legal entity.

25. "Pharmacist" means a person duly licensed by the commission to engage in the practice of pharmacy.

26. "Pharmacy" means every place properly licensed by the commission where the practice of pharmacy is conducted.

27. "Poison" does not include any article or mixture covered by the Washington pesticide control act (chapter 15.58 RCW), as enacted or hereafter amended.

28. "Practice of pharmacy" includes the practice of and responsibility for: Interpreting prescription orders; the compounding, dispensing, labeling, administering, and distributing of drugs and devices; the monitoring of drug therapy and use; the initiating or modifying of drug therapy in accordance with written guidelines or protocols previously established and approved for his or her practice by a practitioner authorized to prescribe drugs; the participating in drug utilization reviews and drug product selection; the proper and safe storing and distributing of drugs and devices and maintenance of proper records thereof; the providing of information on legend drugs which may include, but is not limited to, the advising of therapeutic values, hazards, and the uses of drugs and devices.

29. "Practitioner" means a physician, dentist, veterinarian, nurse, or other person duly authorized by law or rule in the state of Washington to prescribe drugs.

30. "Prescription" means an order for drugs or devices issued by a practitioner duly authorized by law or rule in the state of Washington to prescribe drugs or devices in the course of his or her professional practice for a legitimate medical purpose.

31. "Secretary" means the secretary of health or the secretary's designee.

32. "Shared pharmacy services" means a system that allows a participating pharmacist or pharmacy pursuant to a request from another participating pharmacist or pharmacy to process or fill a prescription or drug order, which may include but is not necessarily limited to preparing, packaging, labeling, data entry, compounding for specific patients, dispensing, performing drug utilization reviews, conducting claims adjudication, obtaining refill authorizations, reviewing therapeutic interventions, or reviewing chart orders.

33. "Wholesaler" means a corporation, individual, or other entity which buys drugs or devices for resale and distribution to corporations, individuals, or entities other than consumers.

\[ [2021 c 78 § 1](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/2021-22/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/House/1445-S.SL.pdf?cite=2021%20c%2078%20§%201); [2016 c 148 § 1](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/2015-16/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/Senate/6203-S.SL.pdf?cite=2016%20c%20148%20§%201); [2015 c 234 § 3](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/2015-16/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/Senate/5460-S.SL.pdf?cite=2015%20c%20234%20§%203); prior:  2013 c 146 § 1; [2013 c 144 § 13](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/2013-14/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/House/1568-S.SL.pdf?cite=2013%20c%20144%20§%2013); [2013 c 19 § 7](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/2013-14/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/House/1609.SL.pdf?cite=2013%20c%2019%20§%207); prior:  2009 c 549 § 1008; [1997 c 129 § 1](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/1997-98/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/House/1424.SL.pdf?cite=1997%20c%20129%20§%201); [1995 c 319 § 2](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/1995-96/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/House/1205-S.SL.pdf?cite=1995%20c%20319%20§%202); [1989 1st ex.s. c 9 § 412](http://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1989ex1c9.pdf?cite=1989%201st%20ex.s.%20c%209%20§%20412); [1984 c 153 § 3](http://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1984c153.pdf?cite=1984%20c%20153%20§%203); [1982 c 182 § 29](http://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1982c182.pdf?cite=1982%20c%20182%20§%2029); [1979 c 90 § 5](http://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1979c90.pdf?cite=1979%20c%2090%20§%205); [1963 c 38 § 1](http://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1963c38.pdf?cite=1963%20c%2038%20§%201); \]

## 18.64.020 - Licensing required.
It shall hereafter be unlawful for any person to practice pharmacy or to institute or operate any pharmacy unless such person shall be a licensed pharmacist or shall place in charge of said pharmacy a licensed pharmacist: PROVIDED, That persons licensed as manufacturers or as wholesalers, and their employees, acting within the scope of their licenses, shall be exempt from this section.

\[ [1979 c 90 § 6](http://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1979c90.pdf?cite=1979%20c%2090%20§%206); [1899 c 121 § 1](http://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1899c121.pdf?cite=1899%20c%20121%20§%201); RRS § 10126; [1891 c 113 § 1](http://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1891c113.pdf?cite=1891%20c%20113%20§%201); \]

## 18.64.040 - Examination fee.
Every applicant for license examination under this chapter shall pay the sum determined by the secretary under RCW 43.70.250 and 43.70.280 before the examination is attempted.

\[ [1996 c 191 § 42](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/1995-96/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/House/2151-S.SL.pdf?cite=1996%20c%20191%20§%2042); [1989 1st ex.s. c 9 § 413](http://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1989ex1c9.pdf?cite=1989%201st%20ex.s.%20c%209%20§%20413); [1979 c 90 § 7](http://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1979c90.pdf?cite=1979%20c%2090%20§%207); [1971 ex.s. c 201 § 1](http://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1971ex1c201.pdf?cite=1971%20ex.s.%20c%20201%20§%201); [1963 c 38 § 2](http://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1963c38.pdf?cite=1963%20c%2038%20§%202); [1949 c 153 § 1](http://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1949c153.pdf?cite=1949%20c%20153%20§%201); [1935 c 98 § 4](http://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1935c98.pdf?cite=1935%20c%2098%20§%204); [1909 c 213 § 5](http://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1909c213.pdf?cite=1909%20c%20213%20§%205); [1899 c 121 § 10](http://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1899c121.pdf?cite=1899%20c%20121%20§%2010); Rem. Supp. 1949 § 10135; \]

## 18.64.043 - Pharmacy license—Fee—Display—Declaration of ownership and location—Penalties.
1. The owner of each pharmacy shall pay an original license fee to be determined by the secretary, and annually thereafter, on or before a date to be determined by the secretary, a fee to be determined by the secretary, for which he or she shall receive a license of location, which shall entitle the owner to operate such pharmacy at the location specified, or such other temporary location as the secretary may approve, for the period ending on a date to be determined by the secretary as provided in RCW 43.70.250 and 43.70.280, and each such owner shall at the time of filing proof of payment of such fee as provided in RCW 18.64.045 as now or hereafter amended, file with the commission on a blank therefor provided, a declaration of ownership and location, which declaration of ownership and location so filed as aforesaid shall be deemed presumptive evidence of ownership of the pharmacy mentioned therein.

2. [Empty]

   a. For a hospital licensed under chapter 70.41 RCW, the license of location provided under this section may include any individual practitioner's office or multipractitioner clinic owned, operated, or under common control with a hospital, and identified by the hospital on the pharmacy application or renewal. The definition of "hospital" under RCW 70.41.020 to exclude "clinics, or physician's offices where patients are not regularly kept as bed patients for twenty-four hours or more," does not limit the ability of a hospital to include individual practitioner's offices or multipractitioner clinics owned, operated, or under common control with a hospital on the pharmacy application or renewal or otherwise prevent the implementation of chapter 118, Laws of 2016. A hospital that elects to include one or more offices or clinics under this subsection on its hospital pharmacy application shall describe the type of services relevant to the practice of pharmacy provided at each such office or clinic as requested by the commission. Any updates to the application, renewal, or related forms that are necessary to accomplish the provision of this licensure option must be made no later than ninety days after June 9, 2016. Nothing in this section limits the ability of a hospital to transfer drugs to another location consistent with federal laws and RCW 70.41.490, regardless of whether or not an election has been made with respect to adding the receiving location to the hospital's pharmacy license under this section.

   b. This chapter must be interpreted in a manner that supports regulatory, inspection, and investigation standards that are reasonable and appropriate based on the level of risk and the type of services provided in a pharmacy, including pharmacy services provided in a hospital and pharmacy services provided in an individual practitioner office or multipractitioner clinic owned, operated, or under common control with a hospital regardless of the office or clinic's physical address. The commission shall provide clear and specific information regarding the standards to which particular pharmacy services will be held, as appropriate, based on the type of pharmacy service provided at a particular location.

   c. The secretary may adopt rules to establish an additional reasonable fee for any such office or clinic.

3. It shall be the duty of the owner to immediately notify the commission of any change of location, ownership, or licensure and to keep the license of location or the renewal thereof properly exhibited in said pharmacy.

4. Failure to comply with this section shall be deemed a misdemeanor, and each day that said failure continues shall be deemed a separate offense.

5. In the event such license fee remains unpaid on the date due, no renewal or new license shall be issued except upon compliance with administrative procedures, administrative requirements, and fees determined as provided in RCW 43.70.250 and 43.70.280.

6. If the commission determines that rules are necessary for the immediate implementation of the inspection standards described in this section, it must adopt rules under the emergency rule-making process in RCW 34.05.350, with such emergency rules effective not later than ninety days after June 9, 2016. The commission shall then begin the process to adopt any necessary permanent rules in accordance with chapter 34.05 RCW. The commission shall ensure that during the transition to the permanent rules adopted under this section, an emergency rule remains in effect without a break between the original emergency rule and any subsequent emergency rules that may be necessary. The commission shall ensure that during the transition to permanent rules there is no interruption in provision of the licensure option described under this section.

\[ [2016 c 118 § 2](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/2015-16/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/Senate/6558-S.SL.pdf?cite=2016%20c%20118%20§%202); [2015 c 234 § 4](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/2015-16/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/Senate/5460-S.SL.pdf?cite=2015%20c%20234%20§%204); [1996 c 191 § 43](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/1995-96/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/House/2151-S.SL.pdf?cite=1996%20c%20191%20§%2043); [1991 c 229 § 3](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/1991-92/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/House/2048-S.SL.pdf?cite=1991%20c%20229%20§%203); [1989 1st ex.s. c 9 § 414](http://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1989ex1c9.pdf?cite=1989%201st%20ex.s.%20c%209%20§%20414); [1984 c 153 § 4](http://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1984c153.pdf?cite=1984%20c%20153%20§%204); [1979 c 90 § 8](http://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1979c90.pdf?cite=1979%20c%2090%20§%208); [1971 ex.s. c 201 § 2](http://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1971ex1c201.pdf?cite=1971%20ex.s.%20c%20201%20§%202); [1963 c 38 § 3](http://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1963c38.pdf?cite=1963%20c%2038%20§%203); [1949 c 153 § 4](http://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1949c153.pdf?cite=1949%20c%20153%20§%204); [1935 c 98 § 8](http://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1935c98.pdf?cite=1935%20c%2098%20§%208); [1909 c 213 § 12](http://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1909c213.pdf?cite=1909%20c%20213%20§%2012); Rem. Supp. 1949 § 10145; \]

## 18.64.044 - Shopkeeper's registration—Penalty—Ephedrine/pseudoephedrine/phenylpropanolamine.
1. A shopkeeper registered as provided in this section may sell nonprescription drugs, if such drugs are sold in the original package of the manufacturer.

2. Every shopkeeper not a licensed pharmacist, desiring to secure the benefits and privileges of this section, is required to register as a shopkeeper through the business licensing system established under chapter 19.02 RCW, and he or she must pay the fee determined by the secretary for registration, and on a date to be determined by the secretary thereafter the fee determined by the secretary for renewal of the registration; and must at all times keep said registration or the current renewal thereof conspicuously exposed in the location to which it applies. In event such shopkeeper's registration is not renewed by the business license expiration date, no renewal or new registration may be issued except upon payment of the registration renewal fee and the business license delinquency fee under chapter 19.02 RCW. This registration fee does not authorize the sale of legend drugs or controlled substances.

3. The registration fees determined by the secretary under subsection (2) of this section may not exceed the cost of registering the shopkeeper.

4. Any shopkeeper who vends or sells, or offers to sell to the public any such nonprescription drug or preparation without having registered to do so as provided in this section, is guilty of a misdemeanor and each sale or offer to sell constitutes a separate offense.

5. A shopkeeper who is not a licensed pharmacy may purchase products containing any detectable quantity of ephedrine, pseudoephedrine, or phenylpropanolamine, or their salts, isomers, or salts of isomers, only from a wholesaler licensed by the department under RCW 18.64.046 or from a manufacturer licensed by the department under RCW 18.64.045. The commission must issue a warning to a shopkeeper who violates this subsection, and may suspend or revoke the registration of the shopkeeper for a subsequent violation.

6. A shopkeeper who has purchased products containing any detectable quantity of ephedrine, pseudoephedrine, or phenylpropanolamine, or their salts, isomers, or salts of isomers, in a suspicious transaction as defined in RCW 69.43.035, is subject to the following requirements:

   a. The shopkeeper may not sell any quantity of ephedrine, pseudoephedrine, or phenylpropanolamine, or their salts, isomers, or salts of isomers, if the total monthly sales of these products exceed ten percent of the shopkeeper's total prior monthly sales of nonprescription drugs in March through October. In November through February, the shopkeeper may not sell any quantity of ephedrine, pseudoephedrine, or phenylpropanolamine, or their salts, isomers, or salts of isomers, if the total monthly sales of these products exceed twenty percent of the shopkeeper's total prior monthly sales of nonprescription drugs. For purposes of this section, "monthly sales" means total dollars paid by buyers. The commission may suspend or revoke the registration of a shopkeeper who violates this subsection.

   b. The shopkeeper must maintain inventory records of the receipt and disposition of nonprescription drugs, utilizing existing inventory controls if an auditor or investigator can determine compliance with (a) of this subsection, and otherwise in the form and manner required by the commission. The records must be available for inspection by the commission or any law enforcement agency and must be maintained for two years. The commission may suspend or revoke the registration of a shopkeeper who violates this subsection. For purposes of this subsection, "disposition" means the return of product to the wholesaler or distributor.

\[ [2013 c 144 § 14](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/2013-14/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/House/1568-S.SL.pdf?cite=2013%20c%20144%20§%2014); [2013 c 19 § 8](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/2013-14/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/House/1609.SL.pdf?cite=2013%20c%2019%20§%208); [2005 c 388 § 5](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/2005-06/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/House/2266-S.SL.pdf?cite=2005%20c%20388%20§%205); [2004 c 52 § 2](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/2003-04/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/Senate/6478-S.SL.pdf?cite=2004%20c%2052%20§%202); [1989 1st ex.s. c 9 § 401](http://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1989ex1c9.pdf?cite=1989%201st%20ex.s.%20c%209%20§%20401); [1989 c 352 § 1](http://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1989c352.pdf?cite=1989%20c%20352%20§%201); [1984 c 153 § 5](http://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1984c153.pdf?cite=1984%20c%20153%20§%205); [1982 c 182 § 30](http://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1982c182.pdf?cite=1982%20c%20182%20§%2030); [1979 c 90 § 17](http://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1979c90.pdf?cite=1979%20c%2090%20§%2017); \]

## 18.64.045 - Manufacturer's license—Fees—Display—Declaration of ownership and location—Penalties.
1. The owner of each and every place of business which manufactures drugs shall pay a license fee to be determined by the secretary, and thereafter, on or before a date to be determined by the secretary, a fee to be determined by the secretary as provided in RCW 43.70.250 and 43.70.280, for which the owner shall receive a license of location from the department, which shall entitle the owner to manufacture drugs at the location specified for the period ending on a date to be determined by the secretary, and each such owner shall at the time of payment of such fee file with the department, on a blank therefor provided, a declaration of ownership and location, which declaration of ownership and location so filed as aforesaid shall be deemed presumptive evidence of the ownership of such place of business mentioned therein. It shall be the duty of the owner to notify immediately the department of any change of location or ownership and to keep the license of location or the renewal thereof properly exhibited in such place of business.

2. Failure to conform with this section is a misdemeanor, and each day that the failure continues is a separate offense.

3. In event the license fee remains unpaid on the date due, no renewal or new license shall be issued except upon compliance with administrative procedures, administrative requirements, and fees determined as provided in RCW 43.70.250 and 43.70.280.

\[ [2003 c 53 § 132](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/2003-04/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/Senate/5758.SL.pdf?cite=2003%20c%2053%20§%20132); [1996 c 191 § 44](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/1995-96/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/House/2151-S.SL.pdf?cite=1996%20c%20191%20§%2044); [1991 c 229 § 4](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/1991-92/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/House/2048-S.SL.pdf?cite=1991%20c%20229%20§%204); [1989 1st ex.s. c 9 § 416](http://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1989ex1c9.pdf?cite=1989%201st%20ex.s.%20c%209%20§%20416); [1984 c 153 § 6](http://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1984c153.pdf?cite=1984%20c%20153%20§%206); [1979 c 90 § 9](http://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1979c90.pdf?cite=1979%20c%2090%20§%209); [1971 ex.s. c 201 § 3](http://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1971ex1c201.pdf?cite=1971%20ex.s.%20c%20201%20§%203); [1963 c 38 § 4](http://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1963c38.pdf?cite=1963%20c%2038%20§%204); [1949 c 153 § 5](http://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1949c153.pdf?cite=1949%20c%20153%20§%205); Rem. Supp. 1949 § 10154-4; \]

## 18.64.046 - Wholesaler's license—Required—Authority of licensee—Penalty—Ephedrine/pseudoephedrine/phenylpropanolamine.
1. The owner of each place of business which sells legend drugs and nonprescription drugs, or nonprescription drugs at wholesale shall pay a license fee to be determined by the secretary, and thereafter, on or before a date to be determined by the secretary as provided in RCW 43.70.250 and 43.70.280, a like fee to be determined by the secretary, for which the owner shall receive a license of location from the department, which shall entitle such owner to either sell legend drugs and nonprescription drugs or nonprescription drugs at wholesale at the location specified for the period ending on a date to be determined by the secretary, and each such owner shall at the time of payment of such fee file with the department, on a blank therefor provided, a declaration of ownership and location, which declaration of ownership and location so filed as aforesaid shall be deemed presumptive evidence of the ownership of such place of business mentioned therein. It shall be the duty of the owner to notify immediately the department of any change of location and ownership and to keep the license of location or the renewal thereof properly exhibited in such place of business.

2. Failure to conform with this section is a misdemeanor, and each day that the failure continues is a separate offense.

3. In event the license fee remains unpaid on the date due, no renewal or new license shall be issued except upon compliance with administrative procedures, administrative requirements, and fees determined as provided in RCW 43.70.250 and 43.70.280.

4. No wholesaler may sell any quantity of drug products containing ephedrine, pseudoephedrine, phenylpropanolamine, or their salts, isomers, or salts of isomers, if the total monthly sales of these products to persons within the state of Washington exceed five percent of the wholesaler's total prior monthly sales of nonprescription drugs to persons within the state in March through October. In November through February, no wholesaler may sell any quantity of drug products containing ephedrine, pseudoephedrine, or phenylpropanolamine, or their salts, isomers, or salts of isomers if the total monthly sales of these products to persons within the state of Washington exceed ten percent of the wholesaler's total prior monthly sales of nonprescription drugs to persons within the state. For purposes of this section, monthly sales means total dollars paid by buyers. The commission may suspend or revoke the license of any wholesaler that violates this section.

5. The commission may exempt a wholesaler from the limitations of subsection (4) of this section if it finds that the wholesaler distributes nonprescription drugs only through transactions between divisions, subsidiaries, or related companies when the wholesaler and the retailer are related by common ownership, and that neither the wholesaler nor the retailer has a history of suspicious transactions in precursor drugs as defined in RCW 69.43.035.

6. The requirements for a license apply to all persons, in Washington and outside of Washington, who sell both legend drugs and nonprescription drugs and to those who sell only nonprescription drugs, at wholesale to pharmacies, practitioners, and shopkeepers in Washington.

7. [Empty]

   a. No wholesaler may sell any product containing any detectable quantity of ephedrine, pseudoephedrine, phenylpropanolamine, or their salts, isomers, or salts of isomers, to any person in Washington other than a pharmacy licensed under this chapter, a shopkeeper or itinerant vendor registered under this chapter, a practitioner as defined in RCW 18.64.011, or a traditional Chinese herbal practitioner as defined in RCW 69.43.105.

   b. A violation of this subsection is punishable as a class C felony according to chapter 9A.20 RCW, and each sale in violation of this subsection constitutes a separate offense.

\[ [2013 c 19 § 9](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/2013-14/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/House/1609.SL.pdf?cite=2013%20c%2019%20§%209); [2005 c 388 § 6](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/2005-06/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/House/2266-S.SL.pdf?cite=2005%20c%20388%20§%206); [2004 c 52 § 3](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/2003-04/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/Senate/6478-S.SL.pdf?cite=2004%20c%2052%20§%203); [2003 c 53 § 133](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/2003-04/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/Senate/5758.SL.pdf?cite=2003%20c%2053%20§%20133); [1996 c 191 § 45](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/1995-96/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/House/2151-S.SL.pdf?cite=1996%20c%20191%20§%2045); [1991 c 229 § 5](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/1991-92/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/House/2048-S.SL.pdf?cite=1991%20c%20229%20§%205); [1989 1st ex.s. c 9 § 417](http://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1989ex1c9.pdf?cite=1989%201st%20ex.s.%20c%209%20§%20417); [1984 c 153 § 7](http://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1984c153.pdf?cite=1984%20c%20153%20§%207); [1979 c 90 § 18](http://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1979c90.pdf?cite=1979%20c%2090%20§%2018); \]

## 18.64.047 - Itinerant vendor's or peddler's registration—Fee—Penalties—Ephedrine/pseudoephedrine/phenylpropanolamine.
1. Any itinerant vendor or any peddler of any nonprescription drug or preparation for the treatment of disease or injury, shall pay a registration fee determined by the secretary on a date to be determined by the secretary as provided in RCW 43.70.250 and 43.70.280. The department may issue a registration to such vendor on an approved application made to the department.

2. Any itinerant vendor or peddler who shall vend or sell, or offer to sell to the public any such nonprescription drug or preparation without having registered to do so as provided in this section, is guilty of a misdemeanor and each sale or offer to sell shall constitute a separate offense.

3. In event the registration fee remains unpaid on the date due, no renewal or new registration shall be issued except upon compliance with administrative procedures, administrative requirements, and fees determined as provided in RCW 43.70.250 and 43.70.280. This registration shall not authorize the sale of legend drugs or controlled substances.

4. An itinerant vendor may purchase products containing any detectable quantity of ephedrine, pseudoephedrine, or phenylpropanolamine, or their salts, isomers, or salts of isomers only from a wholesaler licensed by the department under RCW 18.64.046 or from a manufacturer licensed by the department under RCW 18.64.045. The commission shall issue a warning to an itinerant vendor who violates this subsection, and may suspend or revoke the registration of the vendor for a subsequent violation.

5. An itinerant vendor who has purchased products containing any detectable quantity of ephedrine, pseudoephedrine, or phenylpropanolamine, or their salts, isomers, or salts of isomers, in a suspicious transaction as defined in RCW 69.43.035, is subject to the following requirements:

   a. The itinerant vendor may not sell any quantity of ephedrine, pseudoephedrine, or phenylpropanolamine, or their salts, isomers, or salts of isomers, if the total monthly sales of these products exceed ten percent of the vendor's total prior monthly sales of nonprescription drugs in March through October. In November through February, the vendor may not sell any quantity of ephedrine, pseudoephedrine, or phenylpropanolamine, or their salts, isomers, or salts of isomers, if the total monthly sales of these products exceed twenty percent of the vendor's total prior monthly sales of nonprescription drugs. For purposes of this section, "monthly sales" means total dollars paid by buyers. The commission may suspend or revoke the registration of an itinerant vendor who violates this subsection.

   b. The itinerant vendor shall maintain inventory records of the receipt and disposition of nonprescription drugs, utilizing existing inventory controls if an auditor or investigator can determine compliance with (a) of this subsection, and otherwise in the form and manner required by the commission. The records must be available for inspection by the commission or any law enforcement agency and must be maintained for two years. The commission may suspend or revoke the registration of an itinerant vendor who violates this subsection. For purposes of this subsection, "disposition" means the return of product to the wholesaler or distributor.

\[ [2013 c 19 § 10](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/2013-14/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/House/1609.SL.pdf?cite=2013%20c%2019%20§%2010); [2005 c 388 § 7](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/2005-06/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/House/2266-S.SL.pdf?cite=2005%20c%20388%20§%207); [2004 c 52 § 4](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/2003-04/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/Senate/6478-S.SL.pdf?cite=2004%20c%2052%20§%204); [2003 c 53 § 134](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/2003-04/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/Senate/5758.SL.pdf?cite=2003%20c%2053%20§%20134); [1996 c 191 § 46](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/1995-96/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/House/2151-S.SL.pdf?cite=1996%20c%20191%20§%2046); [1991 c 229 § 6](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/1991-92/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/House/2048-S.SL.pdf?cite=1991%20c%20229%20§%206); [1989 1st ex.s. c 9 § 418](http://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1989ex1c9.pdf?cite=1989%201st%20ex.s.%20c%209%20§%20418); [1984 c 153 § 8](http://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1984c153.pdf?cite=1984%20c%20153%20§%208); [1979 c 90 § 10](http://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1979c90.pdf?cite=1979%20c%2090%20§%2010); [1971 ex.s. c 201 § 4](http://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1971ex1c201.pdf?cite=1971%20ex.s.%20c%20201%20§%204); [1963 c 38 § 5](http://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1963c38.pdf?cite=1963%20c%2038%20§%205); [1949 c 153 § 3](http://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1949c153.pdf?cite=1949%20c%20153%20§%203); [1935 c 98 § 7](http://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1935c98.pdf?cite=1935%20c%2098%20§%207); [1899 c 121 § 16](http://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1899c121.pdf?cite=1899%20c%20121%20§%2016); Rem. Supp. 1949 § 10141; \]

## 18.64.050 - Duplicate for lost or destroyed license or certificate—Certified documents—Fees.
In the event that a license or certificate issued by the department is lost or destroyed, the person to whom it was issued may obtain a duplicate thereof upon furnishing proof of such fact satisfactory to the department and the payment of a fee determined by the secretary.

In the event any person desires any certified document to which he or she is entitled, he or she shall receive the same upon payment of a fee determined by the secretary.

\[ [2011 c 336 § 494](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/2011-12/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/Senate/5045.SL.pdf?cite=2011%20c%20336%20§%20494); [1989 1st ex.s. c 9 § 419](http://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1989ex1c9.pdf?cite=1989%201st%20ex.s.%20c%209%20§%20419); [1984 c 153 § 9](http://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1984c153.pdf?cite=1984%20c%20153%20§%209); [1963 c 38 § 6](http://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1963c38.pdf?cite=1963%20c%2038%20§%206); [1935 c 98 § 9](http://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1935c98.pdf?cite=1935%20c%2098%20§%209); RRS § 10145-1. FORMER PART OF SECTION:  1935 c 98 § 10; RRS § 10145-2, now codified as RCW  18.64.055; \]

## 18.64.080 - Licensing of pharmacists—Registration of interns—Prerequisites—Examinations—Reciprocity—Fees—Renewal.
1. The department may license as a pharmacist any person who has filed an application therefor, subscribed by the person under oath or affirmation, containing such information as the commission may by regulation require, and who—

   a. Is at least eighteen years of age;

   b. Has satisfied the commission that he or she is of good moral and professional character, that he or she will carry out the duties and responsibilities required of a pharmacist, and that he or she is not unfit or unable to practice pharmacy by reason of the extent or manner of his or her proven use of alcoholic beverages, drugs, or controlled substances, or by reason of a proven physical or mental disability;

   c. Holds a baccalaureate degree in pharmacy or a doctor of pharmacy degree granted by a school or college of pharmacy which is accredited by the commission;

   d. Has completed or has otherwise met the internship requirements as set forth in commission rules;

   e. Has satisfactorily passed the necessary examinations approved by the commission and administered by the department.

2. The department shall, at least once in every calendar year, offer an examination to all applicants for a pharmacist license who have completed their educational and internship requirements pursuant to rules promulgated by the commission. The examination shall be determined by the commission. In case of failure at a first examination, the applicant shall have within three years the privilege of a second and third examination. In case of failure in a third examination, the applicant shall not be eligible for further examination until he or she has satisfactorily completed additional preparation as directed and approved by the commission. The applicant must pay the examination fee determined by the secretary for each examination taken. Upon passing the required examinations and complying with all the rules and regulations of the commission and the provisions of this chapter, the department shall grant the applicant a license as a pharmacist and issue to him or her a certificate qualifying him or her to enter into the practice of pharmacy.

3. Any person enrolled as a student of pharmacy in an accredited college may file with the department an application for registration as a pharmacy intern in which application he or she shall be required to furnish such information as the commission may, by regulation, prescribe and, simultaneously with the filing of said application, shall pay to the department a fee to be determined by the secretary. All certificates issued to pharmacy interns shall be valid for a period to be determined by the commission, but in no instance shall the certificate be valid if the individual is no longer making timely progress toward graduation, provided however, the commission may issue an intern certificate to a person to complete an internship to be eligible for initial licensure or for the reinstatement of a previously licensed pharmacist.

 (4) To assure adequate practical instruction, pharmacy internship experience as required under this chapter shall be obtained after registration as a pharmacy intern by practice in any licensed pharmacy or other program meeting the requirements promulgated by regulation of the commission, and shall include such instruction in the practice of pharmacy as the commission by regulation shall prescribe.

 (5) The department may, without examination other than one in the laws relating to the practice of pharmacy, license as a pharmacist any person who, at the time of filing application therefor, is currently licensed as a pharmacist in any other state, territory, or possession of the United States. The person shall produce evidence satisfactory to the department of having had the required secondary and professional education and training and who was licensed as a pharmacist by examination in another state prior to June 13, 1963, shall be required to satisfy only the requirements which existed in this state at the time he or she became licensed in such other state, and that the state in which the person is licensed shall under similar conditions grant reciprocal licenses as pharmacist without examination to pharmacists duly licensed by examination in this state. Every application under this subsection shall be accompanied by a fee determined by the department.

6. The department shall provide for, regulate, and require all persons licensed as pharmacists to renew their license periodically, and shall prescribe the form of such license and information required to be submitted by all applicants.

\[ [2013 c 19 § 11](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/2013-14/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/House/1609.SL.pdf?cite=2013%20c%2019%20§%2011); 1989 1st ex.s. c 9 §§ 403, 420; [1989 c 352 § 3](http://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1989c352.pdf?cite=1989%20c%20352%20§%203); [1984 c 153 § 10](http://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1984c153.pdf?cite=1984%20c%20153%20§%2010); [1981 c 147 § 1](http://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1981c147.pdf?cite=1981%20c%20147%20§%201); [1979 c 90 § 11](http://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1979c90.pdf?cite=1979%20c%2090%20§%2011); [1972 ex.s. c 9 § 1](http://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1972ex1c9.pdf?cite=1972%20ex.s.%20c%209%20§%201); prior:  1971 ex.s. c 292 § 25; [1971 ex.s. c 201 § 5](http://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1971ex1c201.pdf?cite=1971%20ex.s.%20c%20201%20§%205); [1963 c 38 § 7](http://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1963c38.pdf?cite=1963%20c%2038%20§%207); [1931 c 56 § 1](http://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1931c56.pdf?cite=1931%20c%2056%20§%201); [1927 c 253 § 1](http://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1927c253.pdf?cite=1927%20c%20253%20§%201); [1923 c 180 § 3](http://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1923c180.pdf?cite=1923%20c%20180%20§%203); RRS § 10126-3; \]

## 18.64.140 - License—Fees—Display—Inactive license.
Every licensed pharmacist who desires to practice pharmacy shall secure from the department a license, the fee for which shall be determined by the secretary under RCW 43.70.250 and 43.70.280. The administrative procedures, administrative requirements, renewal fee, and late renewal fee shall also be determined under RCW 43.70.250 and 43.70.280. Payment of this fee shall entitle the licensee to a pharmacy law book, subsequent current mailings of all additions, changes, or deletions in the pharmacy practice act, chapter 18.64 RCW, and all additions, changes, or deletions of commission and department regulations. The current license shall be conspicuously displayed to the public in the pharmacy to which it applies. Any licensed pharmacist who desires to leave the active practice of pharmacy in this state may secure from the department an inactive license. The initial license and renewal fees shall be determined by the secretary under RCW 43.70.250 and 43.70.280. The holder of an inactive license may reactivate his or her license to practice pharmacy in accordance with rules adopted by the commission.

\[ [2013 c 19 § 12](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/2013-14/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/House/1609.SL.pdf?cite=2013%20c%2019%20§%2012); [1996 c 191 § 47](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/1995-96/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/House/2151-S.SL.pdf?cite=1996%20c%20191%20§%2047); [1991 c 229 § 7](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/1991-92/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/House/2048-S.SL.pdf?cite=1991%20c%20229%20§%207); [1989 1st ex.s. c 9 § 421](http://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1989ex1c9.pdf?cite=1989%201st%20ex.s.%20c%209%20§%20421); [1984 c 153 § 11](http://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1984c153.pdf?cite=1984%20c%20153%20§%2011); [1979 c 90 § 12](http://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1979c90.pdf?cite=1979%20c%2090%20§%2012); [1971 ex.s. c 201 § 6](http://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1971ex1c201.pdf?cite=1971%20ex.s.%20c%20201%20§%206); [1963 c 38 § 9](http://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1963c38.pdf?cite=1963%20c%2038%20§%209); [1949 c 153 § 2](http://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1949c153.pdf?cite=1949%20c%20153%20§%202); [1935 c 98 § 5](http://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1935c98.pdf?cite=1935%20c%2098%20§%205); [1899 c 121 § 11](http://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1899c121.pdf?cite=1899%20c%20121%20§%2011); Rem. Supp. 1949 § 10136; \]

## 18.64.160 - Disciplinary action against pharmacist's and intern's licenses—Grounds.
In addition to the grounds under RCW 18.130.170 and 18.130.180, the commission may take disciplinary action against the license of any pharmacist or intern upon proof that:

1. His or her license was procured through fraud, misrepresentation, or deceit;

2. In the event that a pharmacist is determined by a court of competent jurisdiction to be mentally incompetent, the pharmacist shall automatically have his or her license suspended by the commission upon the entry of the judgment, regardless of the pendency of an appeal;

3. He or she has knowingly violated or permitted the violation of any provision of any state or federal law, rule, or regulation governing the possession, use, distribution, or dispensing of drugs, including, but not limited to, the violation of any provision of this chapter, Title 69 RCW, or rule or regulation of the commission;

4. He or she has knowingly allowed any unlicensed person to take charge of a pharmacy or engage in the practice of pharmacy, except a pharmacy intern or pharmacy assistant acting as authorized in this chapter or chapter 18.64A RCW in the presence of and under the immediate supervision of a licensed pharmacist;

5. He or she has compounded, dispensed, or caused the compounding or dispensing of any drug or device which contains more or less than the equivalent quantity of ingredient or ingredients specified by the person who prescribed such drug or device: PROVIDED, HOWEVER, That nothing herein shall be construed to prevent the pharmacist from exercising professional judgment in the preparation or providing of such drugs or devices.

\[ [2013 c 19 § 13](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/2013-14/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/House/1609.SL.pdf?cite=2013%20c%2019%20§%2013); [1993 c 367 § 13](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/1993-94/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/Senate/5948-S.SL.pdf?cite=1993%20c%20367%20§%2013); [1985 c 7 § 60](http://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1985c7.pdf?cite=1985%20c%207%20§%2060); [1984 c 153 § 12](http://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1984c153.pdf?cite=1984%20c%20153%20§%2012); [1979 c 90 § 13](http://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1979c90.pdf?cite=1979%20c%2090%20§%2013); [1963 c 38 § 10](http://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1963c38.pdf?cite=1963%20c%2038%20§%2010); [1909 c 213 § 10](http://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1909c213.pdf?cite=1909%20c%20213%20§%2010); RRS § 10143; \]

## 18.64.163 - Uniform Disciplinary Act.
The Uniform Disciplinary Act, chapter 18.130 RCW, governs unlicensed practice, the issuance and denial of licenses of pharmacists and pharmacy interns, and the discipline of licensed pharmacists and pharmacy interns under this chapter.

\[ [1993 c 367 § 14](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/1993-94/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/Senate/5948-S.SL.pdf?cite=1993%20c%20367%20§%2014); \]

## 18.64.165 - Refusal, suspension, and revocation of other licenses.
The commission shall have the power to refuse, suspend, or revoke the license of any manufacturer, wholesaler, pharmacy, shopkeeper, itinerant vendor, peddler, poison distributor, health care entity, or precursor chemical distributor upon proof that:

1. The license was procured through fraud, misrepresentation, or deceit;

2. Except as provided in RCW 9.97.020, the licensee has violated or has permitted any employee to violate any of the laws of this state or the United States relating to drugs, controlled substances, cosmetics, or nonprescription drugs, or has violated any of the rules and regulations of the commission or has been convicted of a felony.

\[ [2016 c 81 § 10](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/2015-16/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/House/1553-S.SL.pdf?cite=2016%20c%2081%20§%2010); [2013 c 19 § 14](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/2013-14/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/House/1609.SL.pdf?cite=2013%20c%2019%20§%2014); [1995 c 319 § 5](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/1995-96/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/House/1205-S.SL.pdf?cite=1995%20c%20319%20§%205); [1989 1st ex.s. c 9 § 404](http://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1989ex1c9.pdf?cite=1989%201st%20ex.s.%20c%209%20§%20404); [1989 c 352 § 4](http://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1989c352.pdf?cite=1989%20c%20352%20§%204); [1979 c 90 § 14](http://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1979c90.pdf?cite=1979%20c%2090%20§%2014); [1963 c 38 § 15](http://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1963c38.pdf?cite=1963%20c%2038%20§%2015); \]

## 18.64.200 - Refusal, suspension, and revocation of other licenses—Appeal procedure.
In any case of the refusal, suspension or revocation of a license by the commission under the provisions of this chapter, appeal may be taken in accordance with the administrative procedure act.

\[ [2013 c 19 § 15](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/2013-14/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/House/1609.SL.pdf?cite=2013%20c%2019%20§%2015); [1963 c 38 § 11](http://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1963c38.pdf?cite=1963%20c%2038%20§%2011); [1909 c 213 § 11](http://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1909c213.pdf?cite=1909%20c%20213%20§%2011); RRS § 10144; \]

## 18.64.205 - Retired active license status.
The commission may adopt rules pursuant to this section authorizing a retired active license status. An individual licensed pursuant to this chapter, who is practicing only in emergent or intermittent circumstances as defined by rule established by the commission, may hold a retired active license at a reduced renewal fee established by the secretary under RCW 43.70.250 and 43.70.280. Such a license shall meet the continuing education requirements, if any, established by the commission for renewals, and is subject to the provisions of the uniform disciplinary act, chapter 18.130 RCW. Individuals who have entered into retired status agreements with the disciplinary authority in any jurisdiction shall not qualify for a retired active license under this section.

\[ [2013 c 19 § 16](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/2013-14/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/House/1609.SL.pdf?cite=2013%20c%2019%20§%2016); [1996 c 191 § 48](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/1995-96/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/House/2151-S.SL.pdf?cite=1996%20c%20191%20§%2048); [1991 c 229 § 2](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/1991-92/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/House/2048-S.SL.pdf?cite=1991%20c%20229%20§%202); \]

## 18.64.245 - Prescription records—Digital or electronic form—Penalty.
1. Every proprietor or manager of a pharmacy shall keep readily available a suitable record of prescriptions which shall preserve for a period of not less than two years the record of every prescription dispensed at such pharmacy which shall be numbered, dated, and filed, and shall produce the same in court or before any grand jury whenever lawfully required to do so. The record shall be maintained either separately from all other records of the pharmacy or in such form that the information required is readily retrievable from ordinary business records of the pharmacy. All recordkeeping requirements for controlled substances must be complied with. Such record of prescriptions shall be for confidential use in the pharmacy, only. The record of prescriptions shall be open for inspection by the commission or any officer of the law, who is authorized to enforce this chapter or chapter 69.41 or 69.50 RCW.

2. When a pharmacy receives a prescription in digital or electronic format through facsimile equipment transmitting an exact visual image of the prescription, or through electronic communication of prescription information, the digital or electronic record of every such prescription dispensed at the pharmacy constitutes a suitable record of prescriptions, provided that the original or direct copy of the prescription is electronically or digitally numbered or referenced, dated, and filed in a form that permits the information required to be readily retrievable.

3. A person violating this section is guilty of a misdemeanor.

\[ [2016 c 148 § 17](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/2015-16/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/Senate/6203-S.SL.pdf?cite=2016%20c%20148%20§%2017); [2013 c 19 § 17](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/2013-14/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/House/1609.SL.pdf?cite=2013%20c%2019%20§%2017); [2003 c 53 § 135](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/2003-04/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/Senate/5758.SL.pdf?cite=2003%20c%2053%20§%20135); [1989 1st ex.s. c 9 § 402](http://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1989ex1c9.pdf?cite=1989%201st%20ex.s.%20c%209%20§%20402); [1989 c 352 § 2](http://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1989c352.pdf?cite=1989%20c%20352%20§%202); [1979 c 90 § 15](http://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1979c90.pdf?cite=1979%20c%2090%20§%2015); [1939 c 28 § 1](http://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1939c28.pdf?cite=1939%20c%2028%20§%201); RRS § 6154-1; \]

## 18.64.246 - Prescriptions—Labels—Cover or cap to meet safety standards—Penalty.
1. To every box, bottle, jar, tube or other container of a prescription which is dispensed there shall be fixed a label bearing the name and address of the dispensing pharmacy, the prescription number, the name of the prescriber, the prescriber's directions, the name and strength of the medication, the name of the patient, the date, and the expiration date. The security of the cover or cap on every bottle or jar shall meet safety standards adopted by the commission. At the prescriber's request, the name and strength of the medication need not be shown. If the prescription is for a combination medication product, the generic names of the medications combined or the trade name used by the manufacturer or distributor for the product shall be noted on the label. The identification of the licensed pharmacist responsible for each dispensing of medication must either be recorded in the pharmacy's record system or on the prescription label. This section shall not apply to the dispensing of medications to in-patients in hospitals.

2. A person violating this section is guilty of a misdemeanor.

\[ [2013 c 19 § 18](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/2013-14/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/House/1609.SL.pdf?cite=2013%20c%2019%20§%2018); [2003 c 53 § 136](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/2003-04/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/Senate/5758.SL.pdf?cite=2003%20c%2053%20§%20136); [2002 c 96 § 1](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/2001-02/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/House/2588.SL.pdf?cite=2002%20c%2096%20§%201); [1984 c 153 § 13](http://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1984c153.pdf?cite=1984%20c%20153%20§%2013); [1971 ex.s. c 99 § 1](http://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1971ex1c99.pdf?cite=1971%20ex.s.%20c%2099%20§%201); [1939 c 28 § 2](http://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1939c28.pdf?cite=1939%20c%2028%20§%202); RRS § 6154-2; \]

## 18.64.250 - Unlawful practices—Penalty for violations—Exceptions.
1. Any person not a licensed pharmacist and not having continuously and regularly in his employ a duly licensed pharmacist within the full meaning of this chapter, who shall practice pharmacy; or

2. Any person who shall permit the compounding and dispensing of prescriptions, or vending of drugs, medicines, or poisons in his or her store or place of business, except under the supervision of a licensed pharmacist; or

3. Any licensed pharmacist or shopkeeper licensed under this chapter, who while continuing in business, shall fail or neglect to procure his or her renewal of license; or

4. Any person who shall wilfully make any false representations to procure a license for himself or herself or for any other person; or

5. Any person who shall violate any of the provisions of this chapter wilfully and knowingly; or

6. Any person who shall take or use or exhibit in or upon any place of business, or advertise in a newspaper, telephone directory, or other directory, or by electronic media, or in any other manner, the title of pharmacist, pharmacy intern, pharmacy assistant, druggist, pharmacy, drug store, medicine store, drug department, drugs, drug sundries, or any title or name of like description or import, or display or permit to be displayed upon said place of business the characteristic pharmacy symbols, bottles or globes, either colored or filled with colored liquids, without having continuously and regularly employed in his or her shop, store, or place of business, during business hours of the pharmacy, a pharmacist duly licensed under this chapter;

shall be guilty of a misdemeanor, and each and every day that such prohibited practice continues shall be deemed a separate offense.

\[ [1979 c 90 § 16](http://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1979c90.pdf?cite=1979%20c%2090%20§%2016); [1963 c 38 § 12](http://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1963c38.pdf?cite=1963%20c%2038%20§%2012); [1935 c 98 § 6](http://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1935c98.pdf?cite=1935%20c%2098%20§%206); [1909 c 213 § 7](http://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1909c213.pdf?cite=1909%20c%20213%20§%207); [1899 c 121 § 13](http://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1899c121.pdf?cite=1899%20c%20121%20§%2013); RRS § 10138. Formerly RCW  18.64.250,  18.64.010,  18.64.030,  18.67.030,  18.67.040 and  18.67.130. FORMER PART OF SECTION:  1909 c 213 § 13; RRS § 10146, now codified as RCW  18.64.280; \]

## 18.64.253 - Students practicing pharmacy—Rules.
1. This chapter does not prohibit a student from practicing pharmacy if:

   a. The student is enrolled in a college or school of pharmacy accredited by the commission and is registered as a pharmacy intern under RCW 18.64.080;

   b. The student performs services without compensation or the expectation of compensation as part of a volunteer activity;

   c. The student is under the direct supervision of a pharmacist licensed under this chapter, a physician licensed under chapter 18.71 RCW, an osteopathic physician and surgeon licensed under chapter 18.57 RCW, or a registered nurse or advanced registered nurse practitioner licensed under chapter 18.79 RCW;

   d. The services the student performs are within the scope of practice of: (i) A pharmacist licensed under this chapter; and (ii) the person supervising the student;

   e. The college or school in which the student is enrolled verifies that the student has demonstrated competency through his or her education and training to perform the services; and

   f. The student provides proof of current malpractice insurance to the volunteer activity organizer prior to performing any services.

2. The commission may adopt rules to implement the requirements of this section.

\[ [2019 c 270 § 1](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/2019-20/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/House/1726.SL.pdf?cite=2019%20c%20270%20§%201); \]

## 18.64.255 - Authorized practices.
Nothing in this chapter shall operate in any manner:

1. To restrict the scope of authorized practice of any practitioner other than a pharmacist, duly licensed as such under the laws of this state. However, a health care entity shall comply with all state and federal laws and rules relating to the dispensing of drugs and the practice of pharmacy; or

2. In the absence of the pharmacist from the hospital pharmacy, to prohibit a registered nurse designated by the hospital and the responsible pharmacist from obtaining from the hospital pharmacy such drugs as are needed in an emergency: PROVIDED, That proper record is kept of such emergency, including the date, time, name of prescriber, the name of the nurse obtaining the drugs, and a list of what drugs and quantities of same were obtained; or

3. To prevent shopkeepers, itinerant vendors, peddlers, or salespersons from dealing in and selling nonprescription drugs, if such drugs are sold in the original packages of the manufacturer, or in packages put up by a licensed pharmacist in the manner provided by the commission, if such shopkeeper, itinerant vendor, salesperson, or peddler shall have obtained a registration.

\[ [2013 c 19 § 19](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/2013-14/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/House/1609.SL.pdf?cite=2013%20c%2019%20§%2019); [2011 c 336 § 495](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/2011-12/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/Senate/5045.SL.pdf?cite=2011%20c%20336%20§%20495); [1995 c 319 § 7](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/1995-96/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/House/1205-S.SL.pdf?cite=1995%20c%20319%20§%207); [1984 c 153 § 14](http://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1984c153.pdf?cite=1984%20c%20153%20§%2014); [1981 c 147 § 3](http://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1981c147.pdf?cite=1981%20c%20147%20§%203); [1979 c 90 § 19](http://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1979c90.pdf?cite=1979%20c%2090%20§%2019); \]

## 18.64.257 - Prescription of legend drugs by dialysis programs.
This chapter shall not prevent a medicare-approved dialysis center or facility operating a medicare-approved home dialysis program from selling, delivering, possessing, or dispensing directly to its dialysis patients, in case or full shelf lots, if prescribed by a physician licensed under chapter 18.57 or 18.71 RCW, those legend drugs determined by the commission pursuant to rule.

\[ [2013 c 19 § 20](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/2013-14/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/House/1609.SL.pdf?cite=2013%20c%2019%20§%2020); [1987 c 41 § 1](http://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1987c41.pdf?cite=1987%20c%2041%20§%201); \]

## 18.64.265 - Schedule II controlled substance—Partial fill permitted.
A pharmacist may partially fill a prescription for a schedule II controlled substance, if the partial fill is requested by the patient or the prescribing practitioner and the total quantity dispensed in all partial fillings does not exceed the quantity prescribed.

\[ [2019 c 314 § 7](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/2019-20/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/Senate/5380-S.SL.pdf?cite=2019%20c%20314%20§%207); \]

## 18.64.270 - Responsibility for drug purity—Compounding—Adulteration—Penalty.
1. Every proprietor of a wholesale or retail drug store shall be held responsible for the quality of all drugs, chemicals or medicines sold or dispensed by him or her except those sold in original packages of the manufacturer and except those articles or preparations known as patent or proprietary medicines.

2. Any medicinal products that are compounded for patient administration or distribution to a licensed practitioner for patient use or administration shall, at a minimum, meet the standards of the official United States pharmacopeia as it applies to nonsterile products and sterile administered products.

3. Any person who shall knowingly, willfully or fraudulently falsify or adulterate any drug or medicinal substance or preparation authorized or recognized by an official compendium or used or intended to be used in medical practice, or shall willfully, knowingly or fraudulently offer for sale, sell or cause the same to be sold for medicinal purposes, is guilty of a misdemeanor, and upon conviction thereof shall be punished by a fine in any sum not less than seventy-five nor more than one hundred and fifty dollars or by imprisonment in the county jail for a period of not less than one month nor more than three months, and any person convicted a third time for violation of this section may suffer both fine and imprisonment. In any case he or she shall forfeit to the state of Washington all drugs or preparations so falsified or adulterated.

\[ [2013 c 146 § 2](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/2013-14/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/House/1800.SL.pdf?cite=2013%20c%20146%20§%202); [2003 c 53 § 137](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/2003-04/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/Senate/5758.SL.pdf?cite=2003%20c%2053%20§%20137); [1963 c 38 § 13](http://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1963c38.pdf?cite=1963%20c%2038%20§%2013); [1899 c 121 § 14](http://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1899c121.pdf?cite=1899%20c%20121%20§%2014); RRS § 10139; [1891 c 153 § 15](http://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1891c153.pdf?cite=1891%20c%20153%20§%2015); \]

## 18.64.275 - Limitations on liability for dispensing of prescription.
1. A pharmacist who dispenses a prescription product in the form manufactured by a commercial manufacturer pursuant to a prescription issued by a licensed practitioner is not liable to a person who was injured through the use of the product, based on a claim of the following:

   a. Strict liability in tort; or

   b. Implied warranty provisions under the uniform commercial code Title 62A RCW.

2. The limitation on pharmacist's liability as provided in subsection (1) of this section shall only apply if the pharmacist complies with recordkeeping requirements pursuant to chapters 18.64, 69.41, and 69.50 RCW, and related administrative rules.

3. A pharmacist who dispenses a prescription product in the form manufactured by a commercial manufacturer issued by a licensed practitioner is liable to the claimant only if the claimant's harm was proximately caused by (a) the negligence of the pharmacist; (b) breach of an express warranty made by the pharmacist; or (c) the intentional misrepresentation of facts about the product by the pharmacist or the intentional concealment of information about the product by the pharmacist. A pharmacist shall not be liable for the product manufacturer's liability except as provided in RCW 7.72.040.

\[ [1991 c 189 § 1](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/1991-92/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/Senate/5466-S.SL.pdf?cite=1991%20c%20189%20§%201); \]

## 18.64.280 - General penalty.
Any person who shall violate any of the provisions of chapter 18.64 RCW and for which a penalty is not provided shall be deemed guilty of a gross misdemeanor.

\[ [1963 c 38 § 14](http://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1963c38.pdf?cite=1963%20c%2038%20§%2014); [1909 c 213 § 13](http://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1909c213.pdf?cite=1909%20c%20213%20§%2013); RRS § 10146; \]

## **18.64.310 - Department of health—Powers and duties.**
The department shall:

1. Establish reasonable license and examination fees and fees for services to other agencies in accordance with RCW 43.70.250 and 43.70.280. In cases where there are unanticipated demands for services, the department may request payment for services directly from the agencies for whom the services are performed, to the extent that revenues or other funds are available. Drug-related investigations regarding licensed health care practitioners shall be funded by an appropriation to the department from the health professions account. The payment may be made on either an advance or a reimbursable basis as approved by the director of financial management;

2. Employ, with confirmation by the commission, an executive officer, who shall be exempt from the provisions of chapter 41.06 RCW **. The executive officer** shall be a pharmacist licensed in Washington**or shall be licensed as a pharmacist in Washington within 180 days of hire. The executive officer shall** employ inspectors, investigators, chemists, and other persons as necessary to assist it for any purpose which it may deem necessary;

3. Investigate and prosecute, at the direction of the commission, including use of subpoena powers, violations of law or regulations under its jurisdiction or the jurisdiction of the commission;

4. Make, at the direction of the commission, inspections and investigations of pharmacies and other places, including dispensing machines, in which drugs or devices are stored, held, compounded, dispensed, sold, or administered to the ultimate consumer, to take and analyze any drugs or devices and to seize and condemn any drugs or devices which are adulterated, misbranded, stored, held, dispensed, distributed, administered, or compounded in violation of or contrary to law. The written operating agreement between the department and the commission, as required by RCW 43.70.240 shall include provisions for the department to involve the commission in carrying out its duties required by this section.

## 18.64.350 - Nonresident pharmacies—Findings.
1. The legislature finds and declares that the practice of pharmacy is a dynamic, patient-oriented health service that applies a scientific body of knowledge to improve and promote patient health by means of appropriate drug use and drug-related therapy.

2. The legislature recognizes that with the proliferation of alternate methods of health delivery, there has arisen among third-party payors and insurance companies the desire to control the cost and utilization of pharmacy services through a variety of mechanisms, including the use of mail-order pharmacies located outside the state of Washington.

3. As a result, the legislature finds and declares that to continue to protect the Washington consumer-patient, all out-of-state pharmacies, including those located in Canada, that provide services to Washington residents shall be licensed by the department of health, disclose specific information about their services, and provide pharmacy services at a high level of protection and competence.

\[ [2005 c 275 § 2](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/2005-06/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/House/1168-S2.SL.pdf?cite=2005%20c%20275%20§%202); [1991 c 87 § 1](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/1991-92/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/Senate/5684.SL.pdf?cite=1991%20c%2087%20§%201); \]

## 18.64.360 - Nonresident pharmacies—Definition—Requirements—Exemption—Reciprocity with Canadian pharmacies.
1. For the purposes of this chapter any pharmacy located outside this state that ships, mails, or delivers, in any manner, except when delivered in person to an individual, controlled substances, legend drugs, or devices into this state is a nonresident pharmacy, and shall be licensed by the department of health, and shall disclose to the department the following:

   a. The location, names, and titles of all owners including corporate officers and all pharmacists employed by the pharmacy who are dispensing controlled substances, legend drugs, or devices to residents of this state. A report containing this information shall be made on an annual basis and within ninety days after a change of location, corporate officer, or pharmacist;

   b. Proof of compliance with all lawful directions and requests for information from the regulatory or licensing agency of the state or Canadian province in which it is licensed as well as with all requests for information made by the department of health under this section. The nonresident pharmacy shall maintain, at all times, a valid unexpired license, permit, or registration to operate the pharmacy in compliance with the laws of the state or Canadian province in which it is located. As a prerequisite for initial licensure and renewal of a license by the department of health, the nonresident pharmacy must submit a copy of an inspection report:

      i. Conducted by an inspection program approved by the commission as having substantially equivalent standards to those of the commission; and

      ii. Issued within two years of application or renewal of a license; and

   c. Proof that it maintains its records of controlled substances, legend drugs, or devices dispensed to patients in this state so that the records are readily retrievable from the records of other drugs dispensed.

2. Any pharmacy subject to this section shall, during its regular hours of operation, provide a toll-free telephone service to facilitate communication between patients in this state and a pharmacist at the pharmacy who has access to the patient's records. This toll-free number shall be disclosed on the label affixed to each container of drugs dispensed to patients in this state.

3. A pharmacy subject to this section shall comply with commission rules regarding the maintenance and use of patient medication record systems.

4. A pharmacy subject to this section shall comply with commission rules regarding the provision of drug information to the patient. Drug information may be contained in written form setting forth directions for use and any additional information necessary to assure the proper utilization of the medication prescribed. A label bearing the expiration date of the prescription must be affixed to each box, bottle, jar, tube, or other container of a prescription that is dispensed in this state by a pharmacy subject to this section.

5. A pharmacy subject to this section shall not dispense medication in a quantity greater than authorized by the prescriber.

6. The license fee specified by the secretary, in accordance with the provisions of RCW 43.70.250, shall not exceed the fee charged to a pharmacy located in this state.

7. The license requirements of this section apply to nonresident pharmacies that ship, mail, or deliver controlled substances, legend drugs, and devices into this state only under a prescription. The commission may grant an exemption from licensing under this section upon application by an out-of-state pharmacy that restricts its dispensing activity in Washington to isolated transactions.

8. Each nonresident pharmacy that ships, mails, or delivers legend drugs or devices into this state shall designate a resident agent in Washington for service of process. The designation of such an agent does not indicate that the nonresident pharmacy is a resident of Washington for tax purposes.

9. The commission shall attempt to develop a reciprocal licensing agreement for licensure of nonresident pharmacies with Health Canada or an applicable Canadian province. If the commission is unable to develop such an agreement, the commission shall develop a process to license participating Canadian nonresident pharmacies through on-site inspection and certification.

\[ [2019 c 25 § 1](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/2019-20/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/House/1412.SL.pdf?cite=2019%20c%2025%20§%201); [2013 c 19 § 22](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/2013-14/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/House/1609.SL.pdf?cite=2013%20c%2019%20§%2022); [2005 c 275 § 3](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/2005-06/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/House/1168-S2.SL.pdf?cite=2005%20c%20275%20§%203); [1996 c 109 § 1](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/1995-96/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/Senate/6441.SL.pdf?cite=1996%20c%20109%20§%201); [1991 c 87 § 2](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/1991-92/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/Senate/5684.SL.pdf?cite=1991%20c%2087%20§%202); \]

## 18.64.370 - Nonresident pharmacies—License required—Application—Renewal.
1. A nonresident pharmacy that has not obtained a license from the department of health shall not conduct the business of selling or distributing drugs in this state.

2. Applications for a nonresident pharmacy license under RCW 18.64.350 through 18.64.400 shall be made on a form furnished by the department. The department may require such information as it deems is reasonably necessary to carry out the purpose of RCW 18.64.350 through 18.64.400.

3. The nonresident pharmacy license shall be renewed annually on a date to be established by the department by rule. In the event the license fee remains unpaid, no renewal or new license shall be issued except upon payment of the license renewal fee and a penalty fee equal to the original license fee.

\[ [1991 c 87 § 3](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/1991-92/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/Senate/5684.SL.pdf?cite=1991%20c%2087%20§%203); \]

## 18.64.380 - Nonresident pharmacies—Information required—Inspection.
A nonresident pharmacy shall:

1. Submit to the department, upon request, information acceptable to the secretary concerning controlled substances shipped, mailed, or delivered to a Washington resident.

2. Submit to on-site inspection by the department of the nonresident pharmacy's prescription records if the information in subsection (1) of this section is not provided to the department upon request.

\[ [1991 c 87 § 4](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/1991-92/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/Senate/5684.SL.pdf?cite=1991%20c%2087%20§%204); \]

## 18.64.390 - Nonresident pharmacies—Violations—Penalties.
1. The commission may deny, revoke, or suspend a nonresident pharmacy license or impose a fine not to exceed one thousand dollars per violation for failure to comply with any requirement of RCW 18.64.350 through 18.64.400.

2. The commission may deny, revoke, or suspend a nonresident pharmacy license or impose a fine not to exceed one thousand dollars per violation for conduct that causes serious bodily or psychological injury to a resident of this state if the secretary has referred the matter to the regulatory or licensing agency in the state in which the pharmacy is located and that regulatory or licensing agency fails to initiate an investigation within forty-five days of the referral under this subsection or fails to make a determination on the referral.

\[ [2013 c 19 § 23](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/2013-14/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/House/1609.SL.pdf?cite=2013%20c%2019%20§%2023); [1991 c 87 § 5](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/1991-92/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/Senate/5684.SL.pdf?cite=1991%20c%2087%20§%205); \]

## 18.64.400 - Nonresident pharmacies—Definition—Advertising.
For the purposes of this chapter, a nonresident pharmacy is defined as any pharmacy located outside this state that ships, mails, or delivers, in any manner, except when delivered in person to an individual, controlled substances, legend drugs, or devices into this state. It is unlawful for:

1. Any nonresident pharmacy that is not licensed under RCW 18.64.350 through 18.64.400 to advertise its service in this state; or

2. Any resident of this state to advertise the pharmaceutical services of a nonresident pharmacy with the knowledge that the nonresident pharmacy is not licensed by the department and that the advertisement will or is likely to induce persons within this state to use the nonresident pharmacy to fill prescriptions.

\[ [1991 c 87 § 6](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/1991-92/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/Senate/5684.SL.pdf?cite=1991%20c%2087%20§%206); \]

## 18.64.410 - Nonresident pharmacies—Rules.
The commission may adopt rules to implement the provisions of RCW 18.64.350 through 18.64.400 and 18.64.420.

\[ [2013 c 19 § 24](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/2013-14/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/House/1609.SL.pdf?cite=2013%20c%2019%20§%2024); [1991 c 87 § 11](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/1991-92/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/Senate/5684.SL.pdf?cite=1991%20c%2087%20§%2011); \]

## 18.64.420 - Nonresident pharmacies—Information confidential—Exceptions.
All records, reports, and information obtained by the department from or on behalf of an entity licensed under chapter 48.20, 48.21, 48.44, or 48.46 RCW shall be confidential and exempt from inspection and copying under chapter 42.56 RCW. Nothing in this section restricts the investigation or the proceedings of the commission or the department so long as the commission and the department comply with the provisions of chapter 42.56 RCW. Nothing in this section or in chapter 42.56 RCW shall restrict the commission or the department from complying with any mandatory reporting requirements that exist or may exist under federal law, nor shall the commission or the department be restricted from providing to any person the name of any nonresident pharmacy that is or has been licensed or disciplined under RCW 18.64.350 through 18.64.400.

\[ [2013 c 19 § 25](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/2013-14/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/House/1609.SL.pdf?cite=2013%20c%2019%20§%2025); [2005 c 274 § 226](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/2005-06/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/House/1133-S.SL.pdf?cite=2005%20c%20274%20§%20226); [1991 c 87 § 12](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/1991-92/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/Senate/5684.SL.pdf?cite=1991%20c%2087%20§%2012); \]

## 18.64.430 - Cost disclosure to health care providers.
The registered or licensed pharmacist under this chapter shall establish and maintain a procedure for disclosing to physicians and other health care providers with prescriptive authority information detailed by prescriber, of the cost and dispensation of all prescriptive medications prescribed by him or her for his or her patients on request. These charges should be made available on at least a quarterly basis for all requested patients and should include medication, dosage, number dispensed, and the cost of the prescription. Pharmacies may provide this information in a summary form for each prescribing physician for all patients rather than as individually itemized reports. All efforts should be made to utilize the existing computerized records and software to provide this information in the least costly format.

\[ [2000 c 171 § 22](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/1999-00/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/House/2400.SL.pdf?cite=2000%20c%20171%20§%2022); [1993 c 492 § 267](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/1993-94/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/Senate/5304-S2.SL.pdf?cite=1993%20c%20492%20§%20267); \]

## 18.64.450 - Health care entity—License requirements for legend drugs and controlled substances—Exception.
1. In order for a health care entity to purchase, administer, dispense, and deliver legend drugs, the health care entity must be licensed by the department.

2. In order for a health care entity to purchase, administer, dispense, and deliver controlled substances, the health care entity must annually obtain a license from the department in accordance with the commission's rules.

3. The receipt, administration, dispensing, and delivery of legend drugs or controlled substances by a health care entity must be performed under the supervision or at the direction of a pharmacist.

4. A health care entity may only administer, dispense, or deliver legend drugs and controlled substances to patients who receive care within the health care entity and in compliance with rules of the commission. Nothing in this subsection shall prohibit a practitioner, in carrying out his or her licensed responsibilities within a health care entity, from dispensing or delivering to a patient of the health care entity drugs for that patient's personal use in an amount not to exceed seventy-two hours of usage.

\[ [2013 c 19 § 26](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/2013-14/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/House/1609.SL.pdf?cite=2013%20c%2019%20§%2026); [1995 c 319 § 3](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/1995-96/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/House/1205-S.SL.pdf?cite=1995%20c%20319%20§%203); \]

## 18.64.460 - Health care entity—License fee—Requirements—Penalty.
1. The owner of a health care entity shall pay an original license fee to be determined by the secretary, and annually thereafter, on or before a date to be determined by the secretary, a fee to be determined by the secretary, for which he or she shall receive a license of location, which shall entitle the owner to purchase legend drugs or controlled substances at the location specified for the period ending on a date to be determined by the secretary. A declaration of ownership and location filed with the department under this section shall be deemed presumptive evidence of ownership of the health care entity.

2. The owner shall immediately notify the department of any change of location or ownership in which case a new application and fee shall be submitted.

3. It shall be the duty of the owner to keep the license of location or the renewal license properly exhibited in the health care entity.

4. Failure to comply with this section is a misdemeanor and each day that the failure continues is a separate offense.

5. In the event that a license fee remains unpaid after the date due, no renewal or new license may be issued except upon payment of the license renewal fee and a penalty fee equal to the original license fee.

\[ [1995 c 319 § 4](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/1995-96/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/House/1205-S.SL.pdf?cite=1995%20c%20319%20§%204); \]

## 18.64.470 - Health care entity—Records.
Every proprietor or manager of a health care entity shall keep readily available a suitable record of drugs, which shall preserve for a period of not less than two years the record of every drug used at such health care entity. The record shall be maintained either separately from all other records of the health care entity or in such form that the information required is readily retrievable from ordinary business records of the health care entity. All recordkeeping requirements for controlled substances must be complied with. Such record of drugs shall be for confidential use in the health care entity, only. The record of drugs shall be open for inspection by the commission, who is authorized to enforce chapter 18.64, 69.41, or 69.50 RCW.

\[ [2013 c 19 § 27](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/2013-14/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/House/1609.SL.pdf?cite=2013%20c%2019%20§%2027); [1995 c 319 § 6](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/1995-96/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/House/1205-S.SL.pdf?cite=1995%20c%20319%20§%206); \]

## 18.64.480 - Waiver request to allow importation of prescription drugs from Canada.
1. By September 1, 2005, the commission shall, in consultation with the department and the health care authority, submit a waiver request to the federal food and drug administration that authorizes the importation of prescription drugs from Canada.

2. Upon approval of the federal waiver allowing for the importation of prescription drugs from Canada, the commission, in consultation with the department and the health care authority, shall license Canadian pharmacies that provide services to Washington residents under RCW 18.64.350 and 18.64.360.

\[ [2013 c 19 § 28](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/2013-14/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/House/1609.SL.pdf?cite=2013%20c%2019%20§%2028); [2005 c 275 § 4](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/2005-06/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/House/1168-S2.SL.pdf?cite=2005%20c%20275%20§%204); \]

## 18.64.490 - Waiver request to authorize the state to license Canadian, United Kingdom, Irish, and other nondomestic prescription drug wholesalers under RCW  18.64.046—Implementation—Rules.
1. By September 1, 2005, the commission shall, in consultation with the department and the health care authority, submit a waiver request to the federal food and drug administration that will authorize the state of Washington to license Canadian, United Kingdom, Irish, and other nondomestic prescription drug wholesalers under RCW 18.64.046, thereby providing retail pharmacies licensed in Washington state the opportunity to purchase prescription drugs from approved wholesalers and pass those savings on to consumers. The waiver shall provide that:

   a. Canadian, United Kingdom, Irish, and other nondomestic prescription drug wholesalers meet the requirements of RCW 18.64.046 and any rules adopted by the commission to implement those requirements;

   b. The commission must ensure the integrity of the prescription drug products being distributed by:

      i. Requiring that prescription drugs purchased from Canadian, United Kingdom, Irish, and other nondomestic wholesalers originate only from approved manufacturing locations;

      ii. Routinely testing prescription drugs purchased from Canadian, United Kingdom, Irish, and other nondomestic wholesalers for safety;

      iii. Establishing safe labeling, tracking, and shipping procedures for prescription drugs purchased from Canadian, United Kingdom, Irish, and other nondomestic wholesalers; and

      iv. Closely monitoring compliance with RCW 18.64.046 and any rules adopted to implement the waiver;

   c. The prescription drugs purchased from Canadian, United Kingdom, Irish, and other nondomestic wholesalers must be limited to those that are not temperature sensitive or infused and for which potential savings to consumers can be demonstrated and those available through purchase by individuals only at licensed retail pharmacies;

   d. To ensure that the program benefits those consumers without insurance coverage for prescription drugs who are most in need of price relief, prescription drug purchases from pharmacies under the waiver will be limited to those not eligible for reimbursement by third party insurance coverage, whether public or private, for the particular drug being purchased; and

   e. Savings associated with purchasing prescription drugs from Canadian, United Kingdom, Irish, and other nondomestic wholesalers will be passed on to consumers.

2. Upon approval of the federal waiver submitted in accordance with subsection (1) of this section, the commission, in consultation with the department and the health care authority, shall submit a detailed implementation plan to the governor and appropriate committees of the legislature that details the mechanisms that the commission will use to implement each component of the waiver under subsection (1) of this section.

3. The commission shall adopt rules as necessary to implement chapter 293, Laws of 2005.

\[ [2013 c 19 § 29](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/2013-14/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/House/1609.SL.pdf?cite=2013%20c%2019%20§%2029); [2005 c 293 § 2](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/2005-06/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/Senate/5470-S.SL.pdf?cite=2005%20c%20293%20§%202); \]

## 18.64.500 - Tamper-resistant prescription pads or paper.
1. Every prescription written in this state by a licensed practitioner must be written on a tamper-resistant prescription pad or paper approved by the commission.

2. A pharmacist may not fill a written prescription from a licensed practitioner unless it is written on an approved tamper-resistant prescription pad or paper, except that a pharmacist may provide emergency supplies in accordance with the commission and other insurance contract requirements.

3. If a hard copy of an electronic prescription is given directly to the patient, the manually signed hard copy prescription must be on approved tamper-resistant paper that meets the requirements of this section.

4. For the purposes of this section, "tamper-resistant prescription pads or paper" means a prescription pad or paper that has been approved by the commission for use and contains the following characteristics:

   a. One or more industry-recognized features designed to prevent unauthorized copying of a completed or blank prescription form;

   b. One or more industry-recognized features designed to prevent the erasure or modification of information written on the prescription form by the practitioner; and

   c. One or more industry-recognized features designed to prevent the use of counterfeit prescription forms.

5. Practitioners shall employ reasonable safeguards to assure against theft or unauthorized use of prescriptions.

6. All vendors must have their tamper-resistant prescription pads or paper approved by the commission prior to the marketing or sale of pads or paper in Washington state.

7. The commission shall create a seal of approval that confirms that a pad or paper contains all three industry-recognized characteristics required by this section. The seal must be affixed to all prescription pads or paper used in this state.

8. The commission may adopt rules necessary for the administration of chapter 328, Laws of 2009.

9. The tamper-resistant prescription pad or paper requirements in this section shall not apply to:

   a. Prescriptions that are transmitted to the pharmacy by telephone, facsimile, or electronic means; or

   b. Prescriptions written for inpatients of a hospital, outpatients of a hospital, residents of a long-term care facility, patients of a hospice program, inpatients or residents of a mental health facility, or individuals incarcerated in a local, state, or federal correction facility, when the health care practitioner authorized to write prescriptions, or his or her authorized agent, writes the order into the patient's medical or clinical record, the order is given directly to the pharmacy, and the patient never has the opportunity to handle the written order.

10. All acts related to the prescribing, dispensing, and records maintenance of all prescriptions shall be in compliance with applicable federal and state laws, rules, and regulations.

\[ [2016 c 148 § 18](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/2015-16/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/Senate/6203-S.SL.pdf?cite=2016%20c%20148%20§%2018); [2013 c 19 § 30](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/2013-14/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/House/1609.SL.pdf?cite=2013%20c%2019%20§%2030); [2009 c 328 § 1](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/2009-10/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/House/2014.SL.pdf?cite=2009%20c%20328%20§%201); \]

## 18.64.510 - Limitation on authority to regulate or establish standards regarding a jail.
Nothing in this chapter or in any provision of law shall be interpreted to invest the commission with the authority to regulate or establish standards regarding a jail as defined in RCW 70.48.020 that does not operate, in whole or in part, a pharmacy or a correctional pharmacy. This section does not limit the commission's authority to regulate a pharmacist that has entered into an agreement with a jail for the provision of pharmaceutical services.

\[ [2013 c 19 § 31](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/2013-14/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/House/1609.SL.pdf?cite=2013%20c%2019%20§%2031); [2009 c 411 § 2](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/2009-10/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/Senate/5252-S.SL.pdf?cite=2009%20c%20411%20§%202); \]

## 18.64.520 - Dispensing of drug other than controlled substance—Supply limit.
1. A pharmacist may dispense not more than a ninety-day supply of a drug other than a controlled substance pursuant to a valid prescription that specifies an initial quantity of less than a ninety-day supply followed by periodic refills of that amount if all of the following requirements are satisfied:

   a. The patient has completed an initial thirty-day supply of the drug. However, if the prescription continues the same medication as previously dispensed in a ninety-day supply, the initial thirty-day supply under this subsection (1) is not required;

   b. The total quantity of dosage units dispensed does not exceed the total quantity of dosage units authorized by the prescriber on the prescription including refills;

   c. The prescriber has not specified on the prescription that dispensing the prescription in an initial amount followed by periodic refills is medically necessary; and

   d. The pharmacist is exercising his or her professional judgment.

2. In no case may a pharmacist dispense a greater supply of a drug pursuant to this section if the prescriber personally indicates, either orally or in their own handwriting, "no change to quantity," or words of similar meaning. Nothing in this section prohibits a prescriber from checking a box on a prescription marked "no change to quantity," provided that the prescriber personally initials the box or checkmark.

3. A pharmacist dispensing an increased supply of a drug pursuant to this section shall notify the prescriber of the increase in the quantity of dosage units dispensed.

4. Nothing in this section may be construed to require a health benefit plan, health carrier, workers' compensation insurance plan, pharmacy benefit manager, or any other person or entity including, but not limited to, a state program or state employer, to provide coverage in a manner inconsistent with the beneficiary's or enrollee's plan benefit.

\[ [2013 c 262 § 1](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/2013-14/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/Senate/5459-S.SL.pdf?cite=2013%20c%20262%20§%201); \]

## 18.64.530 - Topical ophthalmic products—Early refills authorized.
A pharmacist is authorized, without consulting a physician or obtaining a new prescription or refill from a physician, to provide for one early refill of a prescription for topical ophthalmic products if all of the following criteria are met:

1. The refill is requested by a patient at or after seventy percent of the predicted days of use of:

   a. The date the original prescription was dispensed to the patient; or

   b. The date that the last refill of the prescription was dispensed to the patient;

2. The prescriber indicates on the original prescription that a specific number of refills will be needed; and

3. The refill does not exceed the number of refills that the prescriber indicated under subsection (2) of this section.

\[ [2015 c 85 § 1](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/2015-16/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/Senate/5268-S.SL.pdf?cite=2015%20c%2085%20§%201); \]

## 18.64.540 - Provision of drugs to ambulance or aid services associated with providing emergency medical services to patients.
A pharmacy that is licensed under this chapter and operated by a hospital that is licensed under chapter 70.41 RCW may provide drugs to ambulance or aid services that are licensed under RCW 18.73.130 for use associated with providing emergency medical services to patients if the following conditions are met:

1. The hospital is located in the same or an adjacent county to the county in which the ambulance or aid service operates;

2. A medical program director of an ambulance or aid service has requested drugs from the hospital per agreed protocol. A medical program director may only request drugs that:

   a. Are relevant to the level of service provided by the ambulance or aid service and the training of its emergency medical personnel; and

   b. Are approved as part of the ambulance or aid service prehospital patient care protocols for use by emergency medical personnel in the county in which the ambulance or aid service is located; and

3. The provision of the drugs by the pharmacy is not contingent upon arrangements for the transport of patients to the hospital that operates the pharmacy for reasons other than the consideration of patients' medical needs and any patient care procedures.

\[ [2015 c 255 § 1](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/2015-16/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/House/1625-S.SL.pdf?cite=2015%20c%20255%20§%201); \]

## 18.64.550 - Chart order as prescription—Long-term care facilities and hospice programs.
1. A chart order must be considered a prescription if it contains:

   a. The full name of the patient;

   b. The date of issuance;

   c. The name, strength, and dosage form of the drug prescribed;

   d. Directions for use; and

   e. An authorized signature. The order must contain the prescribing practitioner's signature or the signature of the practitioner's authorized agent, including the name of the prescribing practitioner.

2. A licensed nurse, pharmacist, or physician practicing in a long-term care facility or hospice program may act as the practitioner's agent for purposes of this chapter, without need for a written agency agreement, to document a chart order in the patient's medical record on behalf of the prescribing practitioner pending the prescribing practitioner's signature; or to communicate a prescription to a pharmacy whether telephonically, via facsimile, or electronically. The communication of a prescription to a dispenser by the prescriber's agent has the same force and effect as if communicated directly by the authorized practitioner.

3. Nothing in this chapter prevents an authorized credentialed employee of a long-term care facility from transmitting a chart order pursuant to RCW 74.42.230, or transmitting a prescription on behalf of a resident to the extent otherwise authorized by law.

\[ [2020 c 57 § 27](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/2019-20/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/Senate/6028-S.SL.pdf?cite=2020%20c%2057%20§%2027); [2016 c 148 § 2](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/2015-16/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/Senate/6203-S.SL.pdf?cite=2016%20c%20148%20§%202); \]

## 18.64.560 - Nursing homes and hospice programs—Emergency drug kits—Supplemental dose kits.
1. A pharmacy or pharmacist may provide a limited quantity of drugs to a nursing home or hospice program without a prescription for emergency administration by authorized personnel of the facility or program pursuant to a valid prescription. The drugs so provided must be limited to those required to meet the immediate therapeutic needs of residents or patients and may not be available from another authorized source in sufficient time to prevent risk of harm by delay resulting from obtaining drugs from another source. Emergency kits must be secured in a locked room, container, or device to prevent unauthorized access and to ensure the proper environment for preservation of the drugs.

2. In addition to or in connection with the emergency kit authorized under subsection (1) of this section, a nursing home that employs a unit dose drug distribution system may maintain a supplemental dose kit for supplemental nonemergency drug therapy. Supplemental dose kits must be secured in a locked room, container, or device to prevent unauthorized access, and to ensure the proper environment for preservation of the drugs. Administration of drugs from a supplemental dose kit must be under a valid prescription or chart order.

3. The types and quantity of drugs appropriate to serve the resident or patient population of a nursing home or hospice program using an emergency kit or supplemental dose kit and procedures for the proper storage and security of drugs must be determined by a pharmaceutical services committee that includes a pharmacist licensed under this chapter, a physician licensed under chapter 18.71 RCW, an osteopathic physician licensed under chapter 18.57 RCW, or an advanced registered nurse practitioner licensed under chapter 18.79 RCW, and appropriate clinical or administrative personnel of the nursing home or hospice program as set forth in rules adopted by the pharmacy quality assurance commission.

4. A registered nurse or licensed practical nurse operating under appropriate direction and supervision by a pharmacist may restock an emergency kit or supplemental dose kit to provide for safe and timely patient access.

\[ [2016 c 148 § 3](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/2015-16/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/Senate/6203-S.SL.pdf?cite=2016%20c%20148%20§%203); \]

## 18.64.570 - Long-term care facilities and hospice programs—Legend drug resupply—Shared pharmacy services—Unused drugs.
1. A pharmacy may resupply a legend drug to a patient at a long-term care facility or hospice program pursuant to a valid chart order that is signed by the prescribing practitioner, is not time limited, and has not been discontinued.

2. A pharmacy may outsource shared pharmacy services for a long-term care facility or hospice program to another pharmacy if the outsourcing pharmacy:

   a. Obtains approval from the long-term care facility or hospice program to outsource shared pharmacy services for the facility's or program's residents or patients; and

   b. Provides a copy of the prescription or order to the pharmacy providing the shared pharmacy services.

3. Shared pharmacy services may be used for, but are not limited to, the purpose of ensuring that drugs or devices are attainable to meet the immediate needs of residents of the long-term care facility or hospice program, or when the outsourcing pharmacy cannot provide services on an ongoing basis. Where a pharmacy uses shared pharmacy services to have a second pharmacy provide a first dose or partial fill of a prescription or drug order to meet a patient's or resident's immediate needs, the second supplying pharmacy may dispense the first dose or partially filled prescription on a satellite basis without the outsourcing pharmacy being required to fully transfer the prescription to the supplying pharmacy. The supplying pharmacy must retain a copy of the prescription or order on file, a copy of the dispensing record or fill, and must notify the outsourcing pharmacy of the service and quantity provided.

4. A pharmacy may repackage and dispense unused drugs returned by a long-term care facility or hospice program to the pharmacy in per-use, blister packaging, whether in unit dose or modified unit dose form, except as prohibited by federal law. The commission must adopt rules providing for the safe and efficient repackaging, reuse, and disposal of unused drugs returned to a pharmacy from a long-term care facility or hospice program. In adopting rules, the commission must take into consideration the acceptance and dispensing requirements of RCW 69.70.050 (1), (2), and (5).

\[ [2016 c 148 § 4](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/2015-16/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/Senate/6203-S.SL.pdf?cite=2016%20c%20148%20§%204); \]

## 18.64.580 - Long-term care pharmacies—Ratio of pharmacists to pharmacy technicians—Standards.
The commission must adopt reasonable, task-based standards regarding the ratio of pharmacists to pharmacy technicians in a closed door long-term care pharmacy. For the purpose of such standards, a pharmacy technician licensed under chapter 18.64A RCW may not be considered to be practicing as a pharmacy technician while performing administrative tasks not associated with immediate dispensing of drugs that may lawfully be performed by a registered pharmacy assistant. Administrative tasks not associated with immediate dispensing of drugs include but are not necessarily limited to medical records maintenance, billing, prepackaging unit dose drugs, inventory control, delivery, and processing returned drugs.

\[ [2016 c 148 § 5](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/2015-16/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/Senate/6203-S.SL.pdf?cite=2016%20c%20148%20§%205); \]

## 18.64.590 - Long-term care facilities and hospice programs—Commission authority.
The commission may adopt rules implementing RCW 18.64.550 through 18.64.580.

\[ [2016 c 148 § 6](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/2015-16/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/Senate/6203-S.SL.pdf?cite=2016%20c%20148%20§%206); \]

## 18.64.600 - Opioid use disorder medications—Remote dispensing sites—Registration—Rules—Fees.
1. The license of location for a pharmacy licensed under this chapter may be extended to a remote dispensing site where technology is used to dispense medications approved by the United States food and drug administration for the treatment of opioid use disorder.

2. In order for a pharmacy to use remote dispensing sites, a pharmacy must register each separate remote dispensing site with the commission.

3. The commission shall adopt rules that establish minimum standards for remote dispensing sites registered under this section. The minimum standards shall address who may retrieve medications for opioid use disorder stored in or at a remote dispensing site pursuant to a valid prescription or chart order. The minimum standards must require the pharmacy be responsible for stocking and maintaining a perpetual inventory of the medications for opioid use disorder stored in or at the registered remote dispensing site.

4. The secretary may adopt rules to establish a reasonable fee for obtaining and renewing a registration issued under this section.

5. The registration issued under this section will be considered as part of the pharmacy license issued under RCW 18.64.043. If the underlying pharmacy license is not active, then the registration shall be considered inoperable by operation of law.

\[ [2020 c 244 § 2](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/2019-20/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/Senate/6086-S.SL.pdf?cite=2020%20c%20244%20§%202); \]

## 18.64.610 - Prescription drug return and reuse—Rules.
The commission must adopt rules allowing the department of corrections pharmacy to accept returns of unit dose packages or full or partial multiple dose medication cards from the facilities it serves and reuse the unexpired medication.

\[ [2020 c 264 § 1](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/2019-20/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/Senate/6526-S.SL.pdf?cite=2020%20c%20264%20§%201); \]

## 18.64.920 - Repealer—1935 c 98.
All acts and parts of acts in conflict herewith are hereby repealed.

\[ [1935 c 98 § 11](http://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1935c98.pdf?cite=1935%20c%2098%20§%2011); \]


## **18.64.XXX - TBD**
**
The commission may appoint members of panels of at least three members. A quorum for transaction of any business by a panel is a minimum of three members. A majority vote of a quorum of the panel is required to transact business delegated to it by the commission including, but not limited to, licensing, disciplinary, and adjudicative actions.


[ 2021 c XXX § 17; ]**
