# 65.20 - Classification of manufactured homes.
* [65.20.010 - Purpose.](#6520010---purpose)
* [65.20.020 - Definitions.](#6520020---definitions)
* [65.20.030 - Clarification of type of property and perfection of security interests.](#6520030---clarification-of-type-of-property-and-perfection-of-security-interests)
* [65.20.040 - Elimination of title—Application.](#6520040---elimination-of-titleapplication)
* [65.20.050 - Elimination of title—Approval.](#6520050---elimination-of-titleapproval)
* [65.20.060 - Eliminating title—Lenders and conveyances.](#6520060---eliminating-titlelenders-and-conveyances)
* [65.20.070 - Eliminating title—Removing manufactured home when title has been eliminated.](#6520070---eliminating-titleremoving-manufactured-home-when-title-has-been-eliminated)
* [65.20.080 - Eliminating title—Uniform forms.](#6520080---eliminating-titleuniform-forms)
* [65.20.090 - Eliminating title—Fees.](#6520090---eliminating-titlefees)
* [65.20.100 - Eliminating title—General supervision.](#6520100---eliminating-titlegeneral-supervision)
* [65.20.110 - Eliminating title—Rules.](#6520110---eliminating-titlerules)
* [65.20.120 - Eliminating title—Notice.](#6520120---eliminating-titlenotice)
* [65.20.130 - General penalties.](#6520130---general-penalties)
* [65.20.900 - Prospective effect.](#6520900---prospective-effect)
* [65.20.910 - Effect on taxation.](#6520910---effect-on-taxation)
* [65.20.930 - Short title.](#6520930---short-title)
* [65.20.950 - Effective date—1989 c 343.](#6520950---effective-date1989-c-343)
## 65.20.010 - Purpose.
The legislature recognizes that confusion exists regarding the classification of manufactured homes as personal or real property. This confusion is increased because manufactured homes are treated as vehicles in some parts of state statutes, however these homes are often used as residences to house persons residing in the state of Washington. This results in a variety of problems, including: (1) Creating confusion as to the creation, perfection, and priority of security interests in manufactured homes; (2) making it more difficult and expensive to obtain financing and title insurance; (3) making it more difficult to utilize manufactured homes as an affordable housing option; and (4) increasing the risk of problems for and losses to the consumer. Therefore the purpose of this chapter is to clarify the type of property manufactured homes are, particularly relating to security interests, and to provide a statutory process to make the manufactured home real property by eliminating the title to a manufactured home when the home is affixed to land owned by the homeowner.

\[ [1989 c 343 § 1](http://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1989c343.pdf?cite=1989%20c%20343%20§%201); \]

## 65.20.020 - Definitions.
Unless the context clearly requires otherwise, the definitions in this section apply throughout this chapter.

1. "Affixed" means that the manufactured home is installed in accordance with the installation standards in state law.

2. "Department" means the department of licensing.

3. "Eliminating the title" means to cancel an existing certificate of title issued by this state or a foreign jurisdiction or to waive the certificate of title required in chapter 46.12 RCW and recording the appropriate documents in the county real property records pursuant to this chapter.

4. "Homeowner" means the owner of a manufactured home.

5. "Land" means real property excluding the manufactured home.

6. "Manufactured home" or "mobile home" means a structure, designed and constructed to be transportable in one or more sections and is built on a permanent chassis and designed to be used as a dwelling with or without a permanent foundation when connected to the required utilities that include plumbing, heating, and electrical systems contained therein. The structure must comply with the national mobile home construction and safety standards act of 1974 as adopted by chapter 43.22 RCW if applicable. "Manufactured home" does not include a modular home. A structure which met the definition of a "manufactured home" at the time of manufacture is still considered to meet this definition notwithstanding that it is no longer transportable.

7. "Owner" means, when referring to a manufactured home that is titled, the person who is the registered owner. When referring to a mobile home that is untitled pursuant to this chapter, the owner is the person who owns the land. When referring to land, the person may have fee simple title, have a leasehold estate of thirty-five years or more, or be purchasing the property on a real estate contract. Owners include joint tenants, tenants in common, holders of legal life estates, and holders of remainder interests.

8. "Person" means any individual, trustee, partnership, corporation, or other legal entity. "Person" may refer to more than one individual or entity.

9. "Secured party" means the legal owner when referring to a titled mobile home, or the lender securing a loan through a mortgage, deed of trust, or real estate contract when referring to land or land containing an untitled manufactured home pursuant to this chapter.

10. "Security interest" means an interest in property to secure payment of a loan made by a secured party to a borrower.

11. "Title" or "titled" means a certificate of title issued pursuant to chapter 46.12 RCW.

\[ [2010 c 161 § 1154](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/2009-10/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/Senate/6379.SL.pdf?cite=2010%20c%20161%20§%201154); [1989 c 343 § 2](http://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1989c343.pdf?cite=1989%20c%20343%20§%202); \]

## 65.20.030 - Clarification of type of property and perfection of security interests.
When a manufactured home is sold or transferred on or after March 1, 1990, and when all ownership in the manufactured home is transferred through the sale or other transfer of the manufactured home to new owners, the manufactured home shall be real property when the new owners eliminate the title pursuant to this chapter. The manufactured home shall not be real property in any form, including fixture law, unless the title is eliminated under this chapter. Where any person who owned a used manufactured home on March 1, 1990, continues to own the manufactured home on or after March 1, 1990, the interests and rights of owners, secured parties, lienholders, and others in the manufactured home shall be based on the law prior to March 1, 1990, except where the owner voluntarily eliminates the title to the manufactured home by complying with this chapter. If the title to the manufactured home is eliminated under this chapter, the manufactured home shall be treated the same as a site-built structure and ownership shall be based on ownership of the real property through real property law. If the title to the manufactured home has not been eliminated under this chapter, ownership shall be based on chapter 46.12 RCW.

For purposes of perfecting and realizing upon security interests, manufactured homes shall always be treated as follows: (1) If the title has not been eliminated under this chapter, security interests in the manufactured home shall be perfected only under chapter 62A.9A RCW in the case of a manufactured home held as inventory by a manufacturer or dealer or chapter 46.12 RCW in all other cases, and the lien shall be treated as securing personal property for purposes of realizing upon the security interest; or (2) if the title has been eliminated under this chapter, a separate security interest in the manufactured home shall not exist, and the manufactured home shall only be secured as part of the real property through a mortgage, deed of trust, or real estate contract.

\[ 2000 c 250 § 9A-836; [1989 c 343 § 3](http://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1989c343.pdf?cite=1989%20c%20343%20§%203); \]

## 65.20.040 - Elimination of title—Application.
If a manufactured home is affixed to land that is owned by the homeowner, the homeowner may apply to the department to have the title to the manufactured home eliminated. The application package shall consist of the following:

1. An affidavit, in the form prescribed by the department, signed by all the owners of the manufactured home and containing:

    a.  The date;

    b.  The names of all of the owners of record of the manufactured home;

    c.  The legal description of the real property;

    d.  A description of the manufactured home including model year, make, width, length, and vehicle identification number;

    e.  The names of all secured parties in the manufactured home; and

    f.  A statement that the owner of the manufactured home owns the real property to which it is affixed;

2. Certificate of title for the manufactured home, or the manufacturer's statement of origin in the case of a new manufactured home. Where title is held by the secured party as legal owner, the consent of the secured party must be indicated by the legal owner releasing his or her security interest;

3. A certification by the local government indicating that the manufactured home is affixed to the land;

4. Payment of all vehicle license fees, excise tax, use tax, real estate tax, recording fees, and proof of payment of all property taxes then due; and

5. Any other information the department may require.

\[ [2010 c 161 § 1155](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/2009-10/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/Senate/6379.SL.pdf?cite=2010%20c%20161%20§%201155); [1989 c 343 § 4](http://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1989c343.pdf?cite=1989%20c%20343%20§%204); \]

## 65.20.050 - Elimination of title—Approval.
The department shall approve the application for elimination of the title when all requirements listed in RCW 65.20.040 have been satisfied and the registered and legal owners of the manufactured home have consented to the elimination of the title. After approval, the department shall have the approved application recorded in the county or counties in which the land is located and on which the manufactured home is affixed.

The county auditor shall record the approved application, and any other form prescribed by the department, in the county real property records. The manufactured home shall then be treated as real property as if it were a site-built structure. Removal of the manufactured home from the land is prohibited unless the procedures set forth in RCW 65.20.070 are complied with.

The department shall cancel the title after verification that the county auditor has recorded the appropriate documents, and the department shall maintain a record of each manufactured home title eliminated under this chapter by vehicle identification number. The title is deemed eliminated on the date the appropriate documents are recorded by the county auditor.

\[ [1989 c 343 § 5](http://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1989c343.pdf?cite=1989%20c%20343%20§%205); \]

## 65.20.060 - Eliminating title—Lenders and conveyances.
It is the responsibility of the owner, secured parties, and others to take action as necessary to protect their respective interests in conjunction with the elimination of the title or reissuance of a previously eliminated title.

A manufactured home whose title has been eliminated shall be conveyed by deed or real estate contract and shall only be transferred together with the property to which it is affixed, unless procedures described in RCW 65.20.070 are completed.

Nothing in this chapter shall be construed to require a lender to consent to the elimination of the title of a manufactured home, or to retitling a manufactured home under RCW 65.20.070. The obligation of the lender to consent is governed solely by the agreement between the lender and the owner of the manufactured home. Absent any express written contractual obligation, a lender may withhold consent in the lender's sole discretion. In addition, the homeowner shall comply with all reasonable requirements imposed by a lender for obtaining consent, and a lender may charge a reasonable fee for processing a request for consent.

\[ [1989 c 343 § 6](http://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1989c343.pdf?cite=1989%20c%20343%20§%206); \]

## 65.20.070 - Eliminating title—Removing manufactured home when title has been eliminated.
Before physical removal of an untitled manufactured home from the land the home is affixed to, the owner shall follow one of these two procedures:

1. Where a title is to be issued or the home has been destroyed:

    a.  The owner shall apply to the department for a title pursuant to chapter 46.12 RCW. In addition the owner shall provide:

        i.  An affidavit in the form prescribed by the department, signed by the owners of the land and all secured parties and other lienholders in the land consenting to the removal of the home;

        ii.  Payment of recording fees;

        iii.  A certification from a title insurance company listing the owners and lienholders in the land and dated within ten days of the date of application for a new title under this subsection; and

        iv.  Any other information the department may require;

    b.  The owner shall apply for and obtain permits necessary to move a manufactured home including but not limited to the permit required by RCW 46.44.170, and comply with other regulations regarding moving a manufactured home; and

    c.  The department shall approve the application for title when the requirements of chapter 46.12 RCW and this subsection have been satisfied. Upon approval the department shall have the approved application and the affidavit recorded in the county or counties in which the land from which the home is being removed is located and the department shall issue a title. The title is deemed effective on the date the appropriate documents are recorded with the county auditor.

2. Where the manufactured home is to be moved to a new location but again will be affixed to land owned by the homeowner a new title need not be issued, but the following procedures must be complied with:

    a.  The owner shall apply to the department for a transfer in location of the manufactured home and if a new owner, a transfer in ownership by filing an application pursuant to RCW 65.20.040. In addition the owner shall include:

        i.  An affidavit in the form prescribed by the department signed by all of the owners of the real property from which the manufactured home is being moved indicating their consent. The affidavit shall include the consent of all secured parties and other lienholders in the land from which the manufactured home is being moved;

        ii.  A legal description and property tax parcel number of the real property from which the home is being removed and a legal description and property tax parcel number of the land on which the home is being moved to; and

        iii.  A certification from a title insurance company listing the owners and lienholders in the land and dated within ten days of the application for transfer in location under this subsection;

    b.  The owner shall apply for and obtain permits necessary to move a manufactured home including but not limited to RCW 46.44.170, and comply with other regulations regarding moving a manufactured home; and

    c.  After approval, including verification that the owners, secured parties, and other lienholders have consented to the move, the department shall have the approved application recorded in the county or counties in which the land from which the home is being removed and the land to which the home is being moved is located.

\[ [1989 c 343 § 7](http://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1989c343.pdf?cite=1989%20c%20343%20§%207); \]

## 65.20.080 - Eliminating title—Uniform forms.
The department may prepare standard affidavits, lienholder's consents, and other forms to be used pursuant to this chapter.

\[ [1989 c 343 § 8](http://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1989c343.pdf?cite=1989%20c%20343%20§%208); \]

## 65.20.090 - Eliminating title—Fees.
The director may, in addition to the title fees and other fees and taxes required under chapter 46.12 RCW establish by rule a reasonable fee to cover the cost of processing documents and performing services by the department required under this chapter.

Fees collected by the department for services provided by the department under this chapter shall be forwarded to the state treasurer. The state treasurer shall credit such moneys to the motor vehicle fund and all department expenses incurred in carrying out the provisions of this chapter shall be paid from such fund as authorized by legislative appropriation.

\[ [1989 c 343 § 9](http://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1989c343.pdf?cite=1989%20c%20343%20§%209); \]

## 65.20.100 - Eliminating title—General supervision.
The department shall have the general supervision and control of the elimination of titles and shall have full power to do all things necessary and proper to carry out the provisions of this chapter. The director shall have the power to appoint the county auditors as the agents of the department.

\[ [1989 c 343 § 11](http://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1989c343.pdf?cite=1989%20c%20343%20§%2011); \]

## 65.20.110 - Eliminating title—Rules.
The department may make any reasonable rules relating to the enforcement and proper operation of this chapter.

\[ [1989 c 343 § 12](http://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1989c343.pdf?cite=1989%20c%20343%20§%2012); \]

## 65.20.120 - Eliminating title—Notice.
County auditors shall notify county assessors regarding elimination of titles to manufactured homes, the retitling of manufactured homes, and the movement of manufactured homes under RCW 65.20.070.

\[ [1989 c 343 § 13](http://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1989c343.pdf?cite=1989%20c%20343%20§%2013); \]

## 65.20.130 - General penalties.
Every person who falsifies or intentionally omits material information required in an affidavit, or otherwise intentionally violates a material provision of this chapter, is guilty of a gross misdemeanor punishable in accordance with RCW 9A.20.021.

\[ [1989 c 343 § 10](http://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1989c343.pdf?cite=1989%20c%20343%20§%2010); \]

## 65.20.900 - Prospective effect.
This chapter applies prospectively only. RCW 65.20.030 applies to all security interests perfected on or after March 1, 1990. This chapter applies to the sale or transfer of manufactured homes on or after March 1, 1990, where all of the existing ownership rights and interests in the manufactured home are terminated in favor of new and different owners, or where persons who own a manufactured home on or after March 1, 1990, voluntarily elect to eliminate the title to the manufactured home under this chapter.

\[ [1989 c 343 § 14](http://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1989c343.pdf?cite=1989%20c%20343%20§%2014); \]

## 65.20.910 - Effect on taxation.
Nothing in this chapter shall be construed to affect the taxation of manufactured homes.

\[ [1989 c 343 § 15](http://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1989c343.pdf?cite=1989%20c%20343%20§%2015); \]

## 65.20.930 - Short title.
This chapter may be known and cited as the manufactured home real property act.

\[ [1989 c 343 § 17](http://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1989c343.pdf?cite=1989%20c%20343%20§%2017); \]

## 65.20.950 - Effective date—1989 c 343.
This act shall take effect on March 1, 1990.

\[ [1989 c 343 § 27](http://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1989c343.pdf?cite=1989%20c%20343%20§%2027); \]

