# 46.25 - Uniform commercial driver's license act.
* [46.25.001 - Short title.](#4625001---short-title)
* [46.25.005 - Purpose—Construction.](#4625005---purposeconstruction)
* [46.25.010 - Definitions (as amended by 2019 c 44).](#4625010---definitions-as-amended-by-2019-c-44)
* [46.25.020 - One license limit.](#4625020---one-license-limit)
* [46.25.030 - Duties of driver—Notice to department and employer.](#4625030---duties-of-drivernotice-to-department-and-employer)
* [46.25.040 - Duties of employer.](#4625040---duties-of-employer)
* [46.25.050 - Commercial driver's license required—Exceptions, restrictions, reciprocity.](#4625050---commercial-drivers-license-requiredexceptions-restrictions-reciprocity)
* [46.25.052 - Commercial learner's permit—Qualifications, authorized use, endorsements, restrictions, fee distribution.](#4625052---commercial-learners-permitqualifications-authorized-use-endorsements-restrictions-fee-distribution)
* [46.25.054 - Nondomiciled commercial driver's license and commercial learner's permit—Issuance, requirements.](#4625054---nondomiciled-commercial-drivers-license-and-commercial-learners-permitissuance-requirements)
* [46.25.055 - Medical examination and certification—Required—Exception.](#4625055---medical-examination-and-certificationrequiredexception)
* [46.25.057 - Medical certificate—Failure to carry—Penalty.](#4625057---medical-certificatefailure-to-carrypenalty)
* [46.25.060 - Knowledge and skills examination, exemptions, fee distribution.](#4625060---knowledge-and-skills-examination-exemptions-fee-distribution)
* [46.25.070 - Application—Change of address, name—Residency—Hazardous materials endorsement.](#4625070---applicationchange-of-address-nameresidencyhazardous-materials-endorsement)
* [46.25.075 - Certification—Recordkeeping and administration—Downgrade.](#4625075---certificationrecordkeeping-and-administrationdowngrade)
* [46.25.080 - License contents, classifications, endorsements, restrictions.](#4625080---license-contents-classifications-endorsements-restrictions)
* [46.25.082 - Driving record information.](#4625082---driving-record-information)
* [46.25.085 - Hazardous materials endorsement.](#4625085---hazardous-materials-endorsement)
* [46.25.088 - Expiration—Renewal.](#4625088---expirationrenewal)
* [46.25.090 - Disqualification—Grounds for, period of—Records.](#4625090---disqualificationgrounds-for-period-ofrecords)
* [46.25.100 - Restoration after disqualification—Requalification fee, fee distribution.](#4625100---restoration-after-disqualificationrequalification-fee-fee-distribution)
* [46.25.110 - Driving with alcohol or THC in system.](#4625110---driving-with-alcohol-or-thc-in-system)
* [46.25.120 - Test for alcohol or drugs—Disqualification for refusal of test or positive test—Procedures.](#4625120---test-for-alcohol-or-drugsdisqualification-for-refusal-of-test-or-positive-testprocedures)
* [46.25.123 - Mandatory reporting of positive test.](#4625123---mandatory-reporting-of-positive-test)
* [46.25.125 - Disqualification for positive test—Procedure.](#4625125---disqualification-for-positive-testprocedure)
* [46.25.130 - Report of violation, disqualification by nonresident.](#4625130---report-of-violation-disqualification-by-nonresident)
* [46.25.140 - Rules.](#4625140---rules)
* [46.25.150 - Agreements to carry out chapter.](#4625150---agreements-to-carry-out-chapter)
* [46.25.160 - Licenses issued by other jurisdictions.](#4625160---licenses-issued-by-other-jurisdictions)
* [46.25.170 - Civil and criminal penalties.](#4625170---civil-and-criminal-penalties)
* [46.25.901 - Effective dates—1989 c 178.](#4625901---effective-dates1989-c-178)
## 46.25.001 - Short title.
This chapter may be cited as the Uniform Commercial Driver's License Act.

\[ [1989 c 178 § 1](http://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1989c178.pdf?cite=1989%20c%20178%20§%201); \]

## 46.25.005 - Purpose—Construction.
1. The purpose of this chapter is to implement the federal Commercial Motor Vehicle Safety Act of 1986 (CMVSA), Title XII, P.L. 99-570, and reduce or prevent commercial motor vehicle accidents, fatalities, and injuries by:

    a. Permitting commercial drivers to hold only one license;

    b. Disqualifying commercial drivers who have committed certain serious traffic violations, or other specified offenses;

    c. Strengthening licensing and testing standards.

2. This chapter is a remedial law and shall be liberally construed to promote the public health, safety, and welfare. To the extent that this chapter conflicts with general driver licensing provisions, this chapter prevails. Where this chapter is silent, the general driver licensing provisions apply.

\[ [1989 c 178 § 2](http://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1989c178.pdf?cite=1989%20c%20178%20§%202); \]

## 46.25.010 - Definitions (as amended by 2019 c 44).
The definitions set forth in this section apply throughout this chapter.

1. "Alcohol" means any substance containing any form of alcohol, including but not limited to ethanol, methanol, propanol, and isopropanol.

2. "Alcohol concentration" means:

    a. The number of grams of alcohol per one hundred milliliters of blood; or

    b. The number of grams of alcohol per two hundred ten liters of breath.

3. "Commercial driver's license" (CDL) means a license issued to an individual under chapter 46.20 RCW that has been endorsed in accordance with the requirements of this chapter to authorize the individual to drive a class of commercial motor vehicle.

4. The "commercial driver's license information system" (CDLIS) is the information system established pursuant to 49 U.S.C. Sec. 31309 to serve as a clearinghouse for locating information related to the licensing and identification of commercial motor vehicle drivers.

5. "Commercial learner's permit" (CLP) means a permit issued under RCW 46.25.052 for the purposes of behind-the-wheel training.

6. "Commercial motor vehicle" means a motor vehicle or combination of motor vehicles used in commerce to transport passengers or property if the motor vehicle:

    a. Has a gross combination weight rating or gross combination weight of 11,794 kilograms or more (26,001 pounds or more), whichever is greater, inclusive of any towed unit or units with a gross vehicle weight rating or gross vehicle weight of more than 4,536 kilograms (10,000 pounds ((or more))), whichever is greater; or

    b. Has a gross vehicle weight rating or gross vehicle weight of 11,794 kilograms or more (26,001 pounds or more), whichever is greater; or

    c. Is designed to transport sixteen or more passengers, including the driver; or

    d. Is of any size and is used in the transportation of hazardous materials as defined in this section; or

    e. Is a school bus regardless of weight or size.

7. "Conviction" means an unvacated adjudication of guilt, or a determination that a person has violated or failed to comply with the law in a court of original jurisdiction or by an authorized administrative tribunal, an unvacated forfeiture of bail or collateral deposited to secure the person's appearance in court, a plea of guilty or nolo contendere accepted by the court, the payment of a fine or court cost, entry into a deferred prosecution program under chapter 10.05 RCW, or violation of a condition of release without bail, regardless of whether or not the penalty is rebated, suspended, or probated.

8. "Disqualification" means a prohibition against driving a commercial motor vehicle.

9. "Drive" means to drive, operate, or be in physical control of a motor vehicle in any place open to the general public for purposes of vehicular traffic. For purposes of RCW 46.25.100, 46.25.110, and 46.25.120, "drive" includes operation or physical control of a motor vehicle anywhere in the state.

10. "Drugs" are those substances as defined by RCW 69.04.009, including, but not limited to, those substances defined by 49 C.F.R. Sec. 40.3.

11. "Employer" means any person, including the United States, a state, or a political subdivision of a state, who owns or leases a commercial motor vehicle, or assigns a person to drive a commercial motor vehicle.

12. "Gross vehicle weight rating" (GVWR) means the value specified by the manufacturer as the maximum loaded weight of a single vehicle. The GVWR of a combination or articulated vehicle, commonly referred to as the "gross combined weight rating" or GCWR, is the GVWR of the power unit plus the GVWR of the towed unit or units. If the GVWR of any unit cannot be determined, the actual gross weight will be used. If a vehicle with a GVWR of less than 11,794 kilograms (26,001 pounds or less) has been structurally modified to carry a heavier load, then the actual gross weight capacity of the modified vehicle, as determined by RCW 46.44.041 and 46.44.042, will be used as the GVWR.

13. "Hazardous materials" means any material that has been designated as hazardous under 49 U.S.C. Sec. 5103 and is required to be placarded under subpart F of 49 C.F.R. Part 172 or any quantity of a material listed as a select agent or toxin in 42 C.F.R. Part 73.

14. "Motor vehicle" means a vehicle, machine, tractor, trailer, or semitrailer propelled or drawn by mechanical power used on highways, or any other vehicle required to be registered under the laws of this state, but does not include a vehicle, machine, tractor, trailer, or semitrailer operated exclusively on a rail.

15. [Empty]
    a. "Nondomiciled CLP or CDL" means a permit or license, respectively, issued under RCW 46.25.054 to a person who meets one of the following criteria:

        i. Is domiciled in a foreign country as provided in 49 C.F.R. Sec. 383.23(b)(1) as it existed on October 1, 2017, or such subsequent date as may be provided by the department by rule, consistent with the purposes of this section; or

        ii. Is domiciled in another state as provided in 49 C.F.R. Sec. 383.23(b)(2) as it existed on October 1, 2017, or such subsequent date as may be provided by the department by rule, consistent with the purposes of this section.

    b. The definition in this subsection (15) applies exclusively to the use of the term in this chapter and is not to be applied in any other chapter of the Revised Code of Washington.

16. "Out-of-service order" means a declaration by an authorized enforcement officer of a federal, state, Canadian, Mexican, or local jurisdiction that a driver, a commercial motor vehicle, or a motor carrier operation is out-of-service pursuant to 49 C.F.R. Secs. 386.72, 392.5, 395.13, 396.9, or compatible laws, or the North American uniform out-of-service criteria.

17. "Positive alcohol confirmation test" means an alcohol confirmation test that:

    a. Has been conducted by a breath alcohol technician under 49 C.F.R. Part 40; and

    b. Indicates an alcohol concentration of 0.04 or more.

A report that a person has refused an alcohol test, under circumstances that constitute the refusal of an alcohol test under 49 C.F.R. Part 40, will be considered equivalent to a report of a positive alcohol confirmation test for the purposes of this chapter.

18. "School bus" means a commercial motor vehicle used to transport preprimary, primary, or secondary school students from home to school, from school to home, or to and from school-sponsored events. School bus does not include a bus used as a common carrier.

19. "Serious traffic violation" means:

    a. Excessive speeding, defined as fifteen miles per hour or more in excess of the posted limit;

    b. Reckless driving, as defined under state or local law;

    c. Driving while using a personal electronic device, defined as a violation of RCW 46.61.672, which includes in the activities it prohibits driving while holding a personal electronic device in either or both hands and using a hand or finger for texting, or an equivalent administrative rule or local law, ordinance, rule, or resolution;

    d. A violation of a state or local law relating to motor vehicle traffic control, other than a parking violation, arising in connection with an accident or collision resulting in death to any person;

    e. Driving a commercial motor vehicle without obtaining a commercial driver's license;

    f. Driving a commercial motor vehicle without a commercial driver's license in the driver's possession; however, any individual who provides proof to the court by the date the individual must appear in court or pay any fine for such a violation, that the individual held a valid CDL on the date the citation was issued, is not guilty of a "serious traffic violation";

    g. Driving a commercial motor vehicle without the proper class of commercial driver's license endorsement or endorsements for the specific vehicle group being operated or for the passenger or type of cargo being transported; and

    h. Any other violation of a state or local law relating to motor vehicle traffic control, other than a parking violation, that the department determines by rule to be serious.

20. "State" means a state of the United States and the District of Columbia.

21. "Substance abuse professional" means an alcohol and drug specialist meeting the credentials, knowledge, training, and continuing education requirements of 49 C.F.R. Sec. 40.281.

22. "Tank vehicle" means any commercial motor vehicle that is designed to transport any liquid or gaseous materials within a tank or tanks having an individual rated capacity of more than one hundred nineteen gallons and an aggregate rated capacity of one thousand gallons or more that is either permanently or temporarily attached to the vehicle or the chassis. A commercial motor vehicle transporting an empty storage container tank, not designed for transportation, with a rated capacity of one thousand gallons or more that is temporarily attached to a flatbed trailer is not considered a tank vehicle.

23. "Type of driving" means one of the following:

    a. "Nonexcepted interstate," which means the CDL or CLP holder or applicant operates or expects to operate in interstate commerce, is both subject to and meets the qualification requirements under 49 C.F.R. Part 391 as it existed on April 30, 2019, or such subsequent date as may be provided by the department by rule, consistent with the purposes of this section, and is required to obtain a medical examiner's certificate under 49 C.F.R. Sec. 391.45 as it existed on April 30, 2019, or such subsequent date as may be provided by the department by rule, consistent with the purposes of this section;

    b. "Excepted interstate," which means the CDL or CLP holder or applicant operates or expects to operate in interstate commerce, but engages exclusively in transportation or operations excepted under 49 C.F.R. Secs. 390.3(f), 391.2, 391.68, or 398.3, as they existed on April 30, 2019, or such subsequent date as may be provided by the department by rule, consistent with the purposes of this section, from all or parts of the qualification requirements of 49 C.F.R. Part 391 as it existed on April 30, 2019, or such subsequent date as may be provided by the department by rule, consistent with the purposes of this section, and is required to obtain a medical examiner's certificate in accordance with procedures provided in 49 C.F.R. Sec. 391.45 as it existed on April 30, 2019, or such subsequent date as may be provided by the department by rule, consistent with the purposes of this section;

    c. "Nonexcepted intrastate," which means the CDL or CLP holder or applicant operates only in intrastate commerce and is required to obtain a medical examiner's certificate in accordance with procedures provided in 49 C.F.R. Sec. 391.45 as it existed on April 30, 2019, or such subsequent date as may be provided by the department by rule, consistent with the purposes of this section; or

    d. "Excepted intrastate," which means the CDL or CLP holder wishes to maintain a CDL or CLP but not operate a commercial motor vehicle without changing his or her self-certification type.

24. "United States" means the fifty states and the District of Columbia.

25. "Verified positive drug test" means a drug test result or validity testing result from a laboratory certified under the authority of the federal department of health and human services that:

    a. Indicates a drug concentration at or above the cutoff concentration established under 49 C.F.R. Sec. 40.87; and

    b. Has undergone review and final determination by a medical review officer.

A report that a person has refused a drug test, under circumstances that constitute the refusal of a federal department of transportation drug test under 49 C.F.R. Part 40, will be considered equivalent to a report of a verified positive drug test for the purposes of this chapter.

\[ [2019 c 44 § 3](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/2019-20/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/Senate/5230.SL.pdf?cite=2019%20c%2044%20§%203); [2019 c 44 § 2](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/2019-20/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/Senate/5230.SL.pdf?cite=2019%20c%2044%20§%202); [2018 c 49 § 4](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/2017-18/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/House/2696-S.SL.pdf?cite=2018%20c%2049%20§%204); [2017 c 334 § 4](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/2017-18/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/Senate/5289-S.SL.pdf?cite=2017%20c%20334%20§%204); [2017 c 194 § 1](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/2017-18/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/House/1273-S.SL.pdf?cite=2017%20c%20194%20§%201); [2013 c 224 § 3](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/2013-14/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/House/1752-S.SL.pdf?cite=2013%20c%20224%20§%203); [2013 c 224 § 2](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/2013-14/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/House/1752-S.SL.pdf?cite=2013%20c%20224%20§%202); [2011 c 227 § 1](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/2011-12/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/House/1229.SL.pdf?cite=2011%20c%20227%20§%201); [2009 c 181 § 2](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/2009-10/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/Senate/6068.SL.pdf?cite=2009%20c%20181%20§%202); prior:  2006 c 327 § 2; [2006 c 50 § 1](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/2005-06/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/Senate/6549.SL.pdf?cite=2006%20c%2050%20§%201); [2005 c 325 § 2](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/2005-06/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/House/1266-S.SL.pdf?cite=2005%20c%20325%20§%202); [2004 c 187 § 2](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/2003-04/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/House/2532-S.SL.pdf?cite=2004%20c%20187%20§%202); [1996 c 30 § 1](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/1995-96/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/Senate/6487-S.SL.pdf?cite=1996%20c%2030%20§%201); [1989 c 178 § 3](http://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1989c178.pdf?cite=1989%20c%20178%20§%203); \]

## 46.25.020 - One license limit.
No person who drives a commercial motor vehicle may have more than one driver's license.

\[ [1989 c 178 § 4](http://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1989c178.pdf?cite=1989%20c%20178%20§%204); \]

## 46.25.030 - Duties of driver—Notice to department and employer.
1. [Empty]
    a. A driver of a commercial motor vehicle holding a driver's license issued by this state who is convicted of violating a state law or local ordinance relating to motor vehicle traffic control, in any other state or federal, provincial, territorial, or municipal laws of Canada, other than parking violations, shall notify the department in the manner specified by rule of the department within thirty days of the date of conviction.

    b. A driver of a commercial motor vehicle holding a driver's license issued by this state who is convicted of violating a state law or local ordinance relating to motor vehicle traffic control in this or any other state or federal, provincial, territorial, or municipal laws of Canada, other than parking violations, shall notify his or her employer in writing of the conviction within thirty days of the date of conviction.

    c. The notification requirements contained in (a) and (b) of this subsection as they relate to the federal, provincial, territorial, or municipal laws of Canada become effective only when the federal law or federal rules are changed to require the notification or a bilateral or multilateral agreement is entered into between the state of Washington and any Canadian province implementing essentially the same standards of regulation and penalties of all parties as encompassed in this chapter.

2. A driver whose driver's license is suspended, revoked, or canceled by a state, who loses the privilege to drive a commercial motor vehicle in a state for any period, or who is disqualified from driving a commercial motor vehicle for any period, shall notify his or her employer of that fact before the end of the business day following the day the driver received notice of that fact.

3. A person who applies to be a commercial motor vehicle driver shall provide the employer, at the time of the application, with the following information for the ten years preceding the date of application:

    a. A list of the names and addresses of the applicant's previous employers for which the applicant was a driver of a commercial motor vehicle;

    b. The dates between which the applicant drove for each employer; and

    c. The reason for leaving that employer.

The applicant shall certify that all information furnished is true and complete. An employer may require an applicant to provide additional information.

\[ [1989 c 178 § 5](http://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1989c178.pdf?cite=1989%20c%20178%20§%205); \]

## 46.25.040 - Duties of employer.
1. An employer shall require the applicant to provide the information specified in RCW 46.25.030(3).

2. No employer may knowingly allow, permit, or authorize a driver to drive a commercial motor vehicle during any period:

    a. In which the driver has a driver's license suspended, revoked, or canceled by a state, has lost the privilege to drive a commercial motor vehicle in a state, or has been disqualified from driving a commercial motor vehicle; or

    b. In which the driver has more than one driver's license.

\[ [1989 c 178 § 6](http://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1989c178.pdf?cite=1989%20c%20178%20§%206); \]

## 46.25.050 - Commercial driver's license required—Exceptions, restrictions, reciprocity.
1. Drivers of commercial motor vehicles must obtain a commercial driver's license as required under this chapter. Except when driving under a commercial learner's permit and a valid driver's license and accompanied by the holder of a commercial driver's license valid for the vehicle being driven, no person may drive a commercial motor vehicle unless the person holds and is in immediate possession of a commercial driver's license and applicable endorsements valid for the vehicle they are driving. However, this requirement does not apply to any person:

    a. Who is the operator of a farm vehicle, and the vehicle is:

        i. Controlled and operated by a farmer;

        ii. Used to transport either agricultural products, which in this section include Christmas trees and wood products harvested from private tree farms and transported by vehicles weighing no more than forty thousand pounds licensed gross vehicle weight, farm machinery, farm supplies, animal manure, animal manure compost, or any combination of those materials to or from a farm;

        iii. Not used in the operations of a common or contract motor carrier; and

        iv. Used within one hundred fifty miles of the person's farm; or

    b. Who is a firefighter or law enforcement officer operating emergency equipment, and:

        i. The firefighter or law enforcement officer has successfully completed a driver training course approved by the director; and

        ii. The firefighter or law enforcement officer carries a certificate attesting to the successful completion of the approved training course; or

    c. Who is operating a recreational vehicle for noncommercial purposes. As used in this section, "recreational vehicle" includes a vehicle towing a horse trailer for a noncommercial purpose; or

    d. Who is operating a commercial motor vehicle for military purposes. This exception is applicable to active duty military personnel; members of the military reserves; members of the national guard on active duty, including personnel on full-time national guard duty, personnel on part-time national guard training, and national guard military technicians (civilians who are required to wear military uniforms); and active duty United States coast guard personnel. This exception is not applicable to United States reserve technicians; or

    e. Who is a collector truck operator using the vehicle in accordance with RCW 46.25.010.

2. No person may drive a commercial motor vehicle while his or her driving privilege is suspended, revoked, or canceled, while subject to disqualification, or in violation of an out-of-service order. Violations of this subsection shall be punished in the same way as violations of RCW 46.20.342(1).

3. The department must, to the extent possible, enter into reciprocity agreements with adjoining states to allow the waivers described in subsection (1) of this section to apply to drivers holding commercial driver's licenses from those adjoining states.

\[ [2019 c 195 § 2](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/2019-20/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/Senate/5763-S.SL.pdf?cite=2019%20c%20195%20§%202); [2013 c 224 § 4](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/2013-14/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/House/1752-S.SL.pdf?cite=2013%20c%20224%20§%204); [2011 c 142 § 1](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/2011-12/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/House/1966-S.SL.pdf?cite=2011%20c%20142%20§%201); [2006 c 327 § 3](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/2005-06/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/Senate/6552-S.SL.pdf?cite=2006%20c%20327%20§%203); [1995 c 393 § 1](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/1995-96/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/House/1270-S.SL.pdf?cite=1995%20c%20393%20§%201); [1990 c 56 § 1](http://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1990c56.pdf?cite=1990%20c%2056%20§%201); [1989 c 178 § 7](http://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1989c178.pdf?cite=1989%20c%20178%20§%207); \]

## **46.25.052 - Commercial learner's permit—Qualifications, authorized use, endorsements, restrictions, fee distribution.**
1. The department may issue a CLP to an applicant who is at least eighteen years of age and holds a valid Washington state driver's license and who has:

    a. Submitted an application on a form or in a format provided by the department;

    b. Passed the general knowledge examination required for issuance of a CDL under RCW 46.25.060 for the commercial motor vehicle classification in which the applicant operates or expects to operate; and

    c. Paid the appropriate examination fee or fees and an application fee of ten dollars until June 30, 2016, and forty dollars beginning July 1, 2016.

2. A CLP must be marked "commercial learner's permit" or "CLP," and must be, to the maximum extent practicable, tamperproof. Other than a photograph of the applicant, it must include, but not be limited to, the information required on a CDL under RCW 46.25.080(1).

3. The holder of a CLP may drive a commercial motor vehicle on a highway only when in possession of a valid driver's license and accompanied by the holder of a valid CDL who has the proper CDL classification and endorsement or endorsements necessary to operate the commercial motor vehicle. The CDL holder must at all times be physically present in the front seat of the vehicle next to the CLP holder or, in the case of a passenger vehicle, directly behind or in the first row behind the driver and must have the CLP holder under observation and direct supervision.

4. A CLP may be classified in the same manner as a CDL under RCW 46.25.080(2)(a).

5. CLPs may be issued with only P, S, or N endorsements as described in RCW 46.25.080(2)(b).

    a. The holder of a CLP with a P endorsement must have taken and passed the P endorsement knowledge examination. The holder of a CLP with a P endorsement is prohibited from operating a commercial motor vehicle carrying passengers other than authorized employees or representatives of the department and the federal motor carrier safety administration, examiners, other trainees, and the CDL holder accompanying the CLP holder as required under subsection (2) of this section. The P endorsement must be class specific.

    b. The holder of a CLP with an S endorsement must have taken and passed the S endorsement knowledge examination. The holder of a CLP with an S endorsement is prohibited from operating a school bus with passengers other than authorized employees or representatives of the department and the federal motor carrier safety administration, examiners, other trainees, and the CDL holder accompanying the CLP holder as required under subsection (2) of this section.

    c. The holder of a CLP with an N endorsement must have taken and passed the N endorsement knowledge examination. The holder of a CLP with an N endorsement may only operate an empty tank vehicle and is prohibited from operating any tank vehicle that previously contained hazardous materials and has not been purged of any residue.

6. A CLP may be issued with appropriate restrictions as described in RCW 46.25.080(2)(c). In addition, a CLP may be issued with the following restrictions:

    a. "P" restricts the driver from operating a bus with passengers;

    b. "X" restricts the driver from operating a tank vehicle that contains cargo; and

    c. Any restriction as established by rule of the department.

7. The holder of a CLP is not authorized to operate a commercial motor vehicle transporting hazardous materials.

8. A CLP may not be issued for a period to exceed one hundred eighty days. The department may renew the CLP for one additional one hundred eighty-day period without requiring the CLP holder to retake the general and endorsement knowledge examinations.

9. The department must transmit the fees collected for CLPs to the state treasurer for deposit in the highway safety fund unless prior to July 1, 2023, the actions described in (a) or (b) of this subsection occur, in which case the portion of the revenue that is the result of the fee increased in section 206, chapter 44, Laws of 2015 3rd sp. sess. must be distributed to the connecting Washington account created under RCW 46.68.395.

    a. Any state agency files a notice of rule making under chapter 34.05 RCW**, absent explicit legislative authorization enacted subsequent to July 1, 2015,** for a rule regarding a fuel standard based upon or defined by the carbon intensity of fuel, including a low carbon fuel standard or clean fuel standard.

    b. Any state agency otherwise enacts, adopts, orders, or in any way implements a fuel standard based upon or defined by the carbon intensity of fuel, including a low carbon fuel standard or clean fuel standard**, without explicit legislative authorization enacted subsequent to July 1, 2015**.

    c. Nothing in this subsection acknowledges, establishes, or creates legal authority for the department of ecology or any other state agency to enact, adopt, order, or in any way implement a fuel standard based upon or defined by the carbon intensity of fuel, including a low carbon fuel standard or clean fuel standard.

## 46.25.054 - Nondomiciled commercial driver's license and commercial learner's permit—Issuance, requirements.
1. The department may issue a nondomiciled CLP or CDL to a person who meets one of the following criteria:

    a. Is domiciled in a foreign country as provided in 49 C.F.R. Sec. 383.23(b)(1) as it existed on October 1, 2017, or such subsequent date as may be provided by the department by rule, consistent with the purposes of this section; or

    b. Is domiciled in another state as provided in 49 C.F.R. Sec. 383.23(b)(2) as it existed on October 1, 2017, or such subsequent date as may be provided by the department by rule, consistent with the purposes of this section.

2. A person applying for a nondomiciled CLP or CDL must:

    a. Surrender any nonresident or nondomiciled CLP or CDL issued by another state;

    b. Be in possession of a valid driver's license issued by this state or by his or her jurisdiction of domicile;

    c. Meet the requirements of 49 C.F.R. Sec. 383.71(f) as it existed on October 1, 2017, or such subsequent date as may be provided by the department by rule, consistent with the purposes of this section; and

    d. Be otherwise eligible and meet the applicable requirements for the issuance of a CLP or CDL under this chapter, including the payment of all appropriate fees.

3. Before issuing a nondomiciled CLP or CDL, the department must establish the practical capability of disqualifying the person under the conditions applicable to a CLP or CDL issued to a resident of this state.

4. A nondomiciled CLP or CDL issued under this section:

    a. Must be marked "non-domiciled" on the face of the document;

    b. Must include the information, be issued with the appropriate classifications, endorsements, and restrictions, and, except as may be limited under subsection (5) of this section, expire and be subject to renewal in the same manner as required for a CLP or CDL issued under this chapter;

    c. Permits operation of a commercial motor vehicle to the same extent as a CLP or CDL issued under this section; and

    d. Is valid only when accompanied by a valid driver's license issued by this state or by the person's jurisdiction of domicile.

5. A nondomiciled CLP or CDL issued to an individual who has temporary lawful status or valid employment authorization in the United States:

    a. Is valid only when accompanied by an unexpired employment authorization document issued by the United States citizenship and immigration services or an unexpired foreign passport accompanied by an approved I-94 form documenting the applicant's most recent admittance into the United States;

    b. Must expire no later than the expiration of the individual's employment authorization document or authorized stay in the United States, or if there is no expiration date for the employment authorization or authorized stay, one year from the date of issuance; and

    c. May be renewed if the individual presents valid documentary evidence that the employment authorization document or temporary lawful status in the United States is still in effect or has been extended.

6. A person who has been issued a nondomiciled CLP or CDL:

    a. Is subject to all applicable requirements for and disqualifications from operating a commercial motor vehicle as provided under this chapter and is subject to the withdrawal of driving privileges as provided by this title; and

    b. Must notify the department of the issuance of any disqualifications or license suspensions or revocations, whether in the United States or in the person's jurisdiction of domicile.

\[ [2017 c 194 § 4](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/2017-18/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/House/1273-S.SL.pdf?cite=2017%20c%20194%20§%204); [2017 c 194 § 3](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/2017-18/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/House/1273-S.SL.pdf?cite=2017%20c%20194%20§%203); \]

## 46.25.055 - Medical examination and certification—Required—Exception.
Except as provided in 49 C.F.R. Sec. 391.67 as it existed on April 30, 2019, or such subsequent date as may be provided by the department by rule, consistent with the purposes of this section, a person may not drive a commercial motor vehicle unless he or she is physically qualified to do so and is medically examined and certified in accordance with procedures provided in 49 C.F.R. Sec. 391.43 as it existed on April 30, 2019, or such subsequent date as may be provided by the department by rule, consistent with the purposes of this section.

\[ [2018 c 49 § 1](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/2017-18/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/House/2696-S.SL.pdf?cite=2018%20c%2049%20§%201); [2003 c 195 § 3](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/2003-04/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/House/1597-S.SL.pdf?cite=2003%20c%20195%20§%203); \]

## 46.25.057 - Medical certificate—Failure to carry—Penalty.
1. It is a traffic infraction for a licensee under this chapter to drive a commercial vehicle while downgraded for not maintaining a current medical certificate with the department.

2. A person who violates this section is subject to a penalty of two hundred fifty dollars. If the person appears in person before the court or submits by mail written proof that he or she had, at the time the infraction took place, the medical examiner's certificate, the court shall reduce the penalty to fifty dollars.

\[ [2018 c 49 § 2](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/2017-18/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/House/2696-S.SL.pdf?cite=2018%20c%2049%20§%202); [2003 c 195 § 4](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/2003-04/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/House/1597-S.SL.pdf?cite=2003%20c%20195%20§%204); \]

## **46.25.060 - Knowledge and skills examination, exemptions, fee distribution.**
1. [Empty]

    a. No person may be issued a commercial driver's license unless that person:

        i. Is a resident of this state;

        ii. Has successfully completed a course of instruction in the operation of a commercial motor vehicle that has been approved by the director or has been certified by an employer as having the skills and training necessary to operate a commercial motor vehicle safely;

        iii. If he or she does not hold a valid commercial driver's license of the appropriate classification, has been issued a commercial learner's permit under RCW 46.25.052; and

        iv. Has passed a knowledge and skills examination for driving a commercial motor vehicle that complies with minimum federal standards established by federal regulation enumerated in 49 C.F.R. Part 383, subparts F, G, and H, in addition to other requirements imposed by state law or federal regulation. The department may not allow the person to take the skills examination during the first fourteen days after initial issuance of the person's commercial learner's permit. The examinations must be prescribed and conducted by the department.

    b. In addition to the fee charged for issuance or renewal of any license, the applicant shall pay a fee of no more than ten dollars until June 30, 2016, and thirty-five dollars beginning July 1, 2016, for the classified knowledge examination, classified endorsement knowledge examination, or any combination of classified license and endorsement knowledge examinations. The applicant shall pay a fee of no more than one hundred dollars until June 30, 2016, and two hundred fifty dollars beginning July 1, 2016, for each classified skill examination or combination of classified skill examinations conducted by the department.

    c. The department may authorize a person, including an agency of this or another state, an employer, a private driver training facility, or other private institution, or a department, agency, or instrumentality of local government, to administer the skills examination specified by this section under the following conditions:

        i. The examination is the same which would otherwise be administered by the state;

        ii. The third party has entered into an agreement with the state that complies with the requirements of 49 C.F.R. Sec. 383.75; and

        iii. The director has adopted rules as to the third party testing program and the development and justification for fees charged by any third party.

    d. If the applicant's primary use of a commercial driver's license is for any of the following, then the applicant shall pay a fee of no more than seventy-five dollars until June 30, 2016, and two hundred twenty-five dollars beginning July 1, 2016, for the classified skill examination or combination of classified skill examinations whether conducted by the department or a third-party tester:

        i. Public benefit not-for-profit corporations that are federally supported head start programs; or

        ii. Public benefit not-for-profit corporations that support early childhood education and assistance programs as described in RCW 43.216.505.

    e. Beginning July 1, 2016, if the applicant's primary use of a commercial driver's license is to drive a school bus, the applicant shall pay a fee of no more than one hundred dollars for the classified skill examination or combination of classified skill examinations conducted by the department.

    f. Beginning July 1, 2016, payment of the examination fees under this subsection entitles the applicant to take the examination up to two times in order to pass.

2. [Empty]

    a. The department may waive the skills examination and the requirement for completion of a course of instruction in the operation of a commercial motor vehicle specified in this section for a commercial driver's license applicant who meets the requirements of 49 C.F.R. Sec. 383.77. For current or former military service members that meet the requirements of 49 C.F.R. Sec. 383.77, the department may also waive the requirements for a knowledge test for commercial driver's license applicants. Beginning December 1, 2021, the department shall provide an annual report to the house and senate transportation committees and the joint committee on veterans' and military affairs of the legislature on the number and types of waivers granted pursuant to this subsection.

    b. An applicant who operates a commercial motor vehicle for agribusiness purposes is exempt from the course of instruction completion and employer skills and training certification requirements under this section. By January 1, 2010, the department shall submit recommendations regarding the continuance of this exemption to the transportation committees of the legislature. For purposes of this subsection (2)(b), "agribusiness" means a private carrier who in the normal course of business primarily transports:

        i. Farm machinery, farm equipment, implements of husbandry, farm supplies, and materials used in farming;

        ii. Agricultural inputs, such as seed, feed, fertilizer, and crop protection products;

        iii. Unprocessed agricultural commodities, as defined in RCW 17.21.020, where such commodities are produced by farmers, ranchers, vineyardists, or orchardists; or

        iv. Any combination of (b)(i) through (iii) of this subsection.

The department shall notify the transportation committees of the legislature if the federal government takes action affecting the exemption provided in this subsection (2)(b).

3. A commercial driver's license or commercial learner's permit may not be issued to a person while the person is subject to a disqualification from driving a commercial motor vehicle, or while the person's driver's license is suspended, revoked, or canceled in any state, nor may a commercial driver's license be issued to a person who has a commercial driver's license issued by any other state unless the person first surrenders all such licenses, which must be returned to the issuing state for cancellation.

4. The fees under this section must be deposited into the highway safety fund unless prior to July 1, 2023, the actions described in (a) or (b) of this subsection occur, in which case the portion of the revenue that is the result of the fee increased in section 207, chapter 44, Laws of 2015 3rd sp. sess. must be distributed to the connecting Washington account created under RCW 46.68.395.

    a. Any state agency files a notice of rule making under chapter 34.05 RCW**, absent explicit legislative authorization enacted subsequent to July 1, 2015,** for a rule regarding a fuel standard based upon or defined by the carbon intensity of fuel, including a low carbon fuel standard or clean fuel standard.

    b. Any state agency otherwise enacts, adopts, orders, or in any way implements a fuel standard based upon or defined by the carbon intensity of fuel, including a low carbon fuel standard or clean fuel standard**, without explicit legislative authorization enacted subsequent to July 1, 2015**.

    c. Nothing in this subsection acknowledges, establishes, or creates legal authority for the department of ecology or any other state agency to enact, adopt, order, or in any way implement a fuel standard based upon or defined by the carbon intensity of fuel, including a low carbon fuel standard or clean fuel standard.

## 46.25.070 - Application—Change of address, name—Residency—Hazardous materials endorsement.
1. The application for a commercial driver's license or commercial learner's permit must include the following:

    a. The full name and current mailing and residential address of the person;

    b. A physical description of the person, including sex, height, weight, and eye color;

    c. Date of birth;

    d. Except in the case of an applicant for a nondomiciled CLP or CDL who is domiciled in a foreign country and who has not been issued a social security number, the applicant's social security number;

    e. The person's signature;

    f. Certifications including those required by 49 C.F.R. Sec. 383.71;

    g. The names of all states where the applicant has previously been licensed to drive any type of motor vehicle during the previous ten years;

    h. Any other information required by the department; and

    i. A consent to release driving record information to parties identified in chapter 46.52 RCW and this chapter.

2. An applicant for a commercial driver's license or commercial learner's permit, and every licensee seeking to renew his or her license, must meet the requirements of 49 C.F.R. Sec. 383.71 as it existed on July 8, 2014, or such subsequent date as may be provided by the department by rule, consistent with the purposes of this section.

3. An applicant for a hazardous materials endorsement must submit an application and comply with federal transportation security administration requirements as specified in 49 C.F.R. Part 1572.

4. When a licensee changes his or her name, mailing address, or residence address, the person shall notify the department as provided in RCW 46.20.205.

5. No person who has been a resident of this state for thirty days may drive a commercial motor vehicle under the authority of a commercial driver's license issued by another jurisdiction.

\[ [2017 c 194 § 2](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/2017-18/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/House/1273-S.SL.pdf?cite=2017%20c%20194%20§%202); [2013 c 224 § 7](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/2013-14/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/House/1752-S.SL.pdf?cite=2013%20c%20224%20§%207); [2004 c 187 § 4](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/2003-04/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/House/2532-S.SL.pdf?cite=2004%20c%20187%20§%204); [2003 c 195 § 2](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/2003-04/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/House/1597-S.SL.pdf?cite=2003%20c%20195%20§%202); [1991 c 73 § 2](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/1991-92/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/Senate/5290.SL.pdf?cite=1991%20c%2073%20§%202); [1989 c 178 § 9](http://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1989c178.pdf?cite=1989%20c%20178%20§%209); \]

## 46.25.075 - Certification—Recordkeeping and administration—Downgrade.
1. Any person applying for a CDL or CLP must certify that he or she is or expects to be engaged in one of the following types of driving:

    a. Nonexcepted interstate;

    b. Excepted interstate;

    c. Nonexcepted intrastate; or

    d. Excepted intrastate.

2. A CDL or CLP applicant or holder who certifies under subsection (1)(a), (b), or (c) of this section that he or she is or expects to be engaged in nonexcepted interstate, excepted interstate, or nonexcepted intrastate commerce must provide a copy of a medical examiner's certificate prepared by a medical examiner, as defined in 49 C.F.R. Sec. 390.5 as it existed on April 30, 2019, or such subsequent date as may be provided by the department by rule, consistent with the purposes of this section. A CDL or CLP holder who certifies under subsection (1)(a), (b), or (c) of this section must provide a copy of each subsequently issued medical examiner's certificate.

3. For each operator of a commercial motor vehicle required to have a CDL or CLP, the department must meet the following requirements:

    a. [Empty]
        i. The driver's self-certification of type of driving under subsection (1) of this section must be maintained on the driver's record and the CDLIS driver record;

        ii. The copy of a medical examiner's certificate, when provided under subsection (2) of this section, must be retained for three years beyond the date the certificate was issued; and

        iii. When a medical examiner's certificate is provided under subsection (2) of this section, the information required under 49 C.F.R. Sec. 383.73 as it existed on April 30, 2019, or such subsequent date as may be provided by the department by rule, consistent with the purposes of this section must be posted to the CDLIS driver record within ten calendar days from the date provided. The indicator of medical certification status, such as "certified" or "not-certified," must be maintained on the driver's record.

    b. Within ten calendar days of the driver's medical certification status expiring or a medical variance expiring or being rescinded, the medical certification status of the driver must be updated to "not-certified."

    c. Within ten calendar days of receiving information from the federal motor carrier safety administration or the department regarding issuance or renewal of a medical variance for a driver, the department must update the CDLIS driver record to include the medical variance information.

4. Upon receiving an electronic copy of the medical examiner's certificate from the federal motor carrier safety administration, the department must post a medical qualification status of "certified" on the CDLIS driver record for the driver.

5. [Empty]
    a. If a driver's medical certification or medical variance expires, or the federal motor carrier safety administration or issuing medical examiner notifies the department that a medical variance was removed or rescinded, the department must:

        i. Notify the driver of his or her "not-certified" medical certification status and that the privilege of operating a commercial motor vehicle will be removed from the CDL or CLP unless the driver provides a current medical certificate or medical variance, or changes his or her self-certification to driving in excepted intrastate commerce; and

        ii. Initiate procedures for downgrading the CDL or CLP. The CDL or CLP downgrade must be completed and recorded within sixty days of the driver's medical certification status becoming "not-certified" to operate a commercial motor vehicle.

    b. If a driver fails to provide the department with the certification required in subsection (1) of this section, or a current medical examiner's certificate if the driver self-certifies under subsection (1)(a), (b), or (c) of this section that he or she is operating in nonexcepted interstate, excepted interstate, or nonexcepted intrastate commerce as required in subsection (2) of this section, the department must mark the CDLIS driver record as "not-certified" and initiate a CDL or CLP downgrade in accordance with (a)(ii) of this subsection.

    c. A driver whose CDL or CLP has been downgraded under this subsection may restore the CDL or CLP privilege by providing the necessary certifications or medical variance information to the department.

\[ [2018 c 49 § 3](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/2017-18/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/House/2696-S.SL.pdf?cite=2018%20c%2049%20§%203); [2013 c 224 § 8](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/2013-14/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/House/1752-S.SL.pdf?cite=2013%20c%20224%20§%208); [2011 c 227 § 3](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/2011-12/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/House/1229.SL.pdf?cite=2011%20c%20227%20§%203); \]

## 46.25.080 - License contents, classifications, endorsements, restrictions.
1. The commercial driver's license must be marked "commercial driver's license" or "CDL," and must be, to the maximum extent practicable, tamperproof. It must include, but not be limited to, the following information:

    a. The name and residence address of the person;

    b. The person's color photograph;

    c. A physical description of the person including sex, height, weight, and eye color;

    d. Date of birth;

    e. The person's social security number or any number or identifier deemed appropriate by the department;

    f. The person's signature;

    g. The class or type of commercial motor vehicle or vehicles that the person is authorized to drive, together with any endorsements or restrictions;

    h. The name of the state; and

    i. The dates between which the license is valid.

2. Commercial driver's licenses may be issued with the classifications, endorsements, and restrictions set forth in this subsection. The holder of a valid commercial driver's license may drive all vehicles in the class for which that license is issued and all lesser classes of vehicles except motorcycles and vehicles that require an endorsement, unless the proper endorsement appears on the license.

    a. Licenses may be classified as follows:

        i. Class A is a combination vehicle.

        ii. Class B is a heavy straight vehicle.

        iii. Class C is a small vehicle that is:

(A) Designed to transport sixteen or more passengers, including the driver; or

(B) Used in the transportation of hazardous materials.

    b. The following endorsements may be placed on a license:

        i. "H" authorizes the driver to drive a vehicle transporting hazardous materials.

        ii. "T" authorizes driving double and triple trailers.

        iii. "P" authorizes driving vehicles carrying passengers, other than school buses.

        iv. "N" authorizes driving tank vehicles.

    v. "X" represents a combination of hazardous materials and tank vehicle endorsements.

    vi. "S" authorizes driving school buses.

    c. The following restrictions may be placed on a license:

        i. "E" restricts the driver from operating a commercial motor vehicle equipped with a manual transmission.

        ii. "K" restricts the driver from interstate operation of a commercial motor vehicle.

        iii. "L" restricts the driver from operating a commercial motor vehicle equipped with air brakes.

        iv. "M" restricts the driver from operating class A passenger vehicles.

    v. "N" restricts the driver from operating class A and B passenger vehicles.

    vi. "O" restricts the driver from operating tractor-trailer commercial motor vehicles.

    vii. "V" means that the driver has been issued a medical variance.

    viii. "Z" restricts the driver from operating a commercial motor vehicle equipped with full air brakes.

    d. The license may be issued with additional endorsements and restrictions as established by rule of the director.

\[ [2013 c 224 § 9](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/2013-14/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/House/1752-S.SL.pdf?cite=2013%20c%20224%20§%209); [2011 c 227 § 2](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/2011-12/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/House/1229.SL.pdf?cite=2011%20c%20227%20§%202); [2004 c 249 § 8](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/2003-04/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/Senate/5428-S.SL.pdf?cite=2004%20c%20249%20§%208); [2004 c 187 § 5](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/2003-04/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/House/2532-S.SL.pdf?cite=2004%20c%20187%20§%205); [1996 c 30 § 2](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/1995-96/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/Senate/6487-S.SL.pdf?cite=1996%20c%2030%20§%202); [1989 c 178 § 10](http://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1989c178.pdf?cite=1989%20c%20178%20§%2010); \]

## 46.25.082 - Driving record information.
1. [Empty]
    a. Before issuing a CDL or CLP, the department must obtain driving record information:

        i. Through the commercial driver's license information system;

        ii. Through the national driver register;

        iii. From the current state of record; and

        iv. From all states where the applicant was previously licensed over the last ten years to drive any type of motor vehicle.

    b. A driving record check under (a)(iv) of this subsection need only be performed once at the time of initial issuance of a CDL or CLP, provided a notation is made on the driver's record confirming that the driving record check has been made and noting the date it was completed.

2. Within ten days after issuing a CDL or CLP, the department must notify the commercial driver's license information system of the information required under 49 C.F.R. Sec. 383.73 as it existed on July 8, 2014, or such subsequent date as may be provided by the department by rule, consistent with the purposes of this section and provide all information required to ensure identification of the person.

\[ [2013 c 224 § 10](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/2013-14/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/House/1752-S.SL.pdf?cite=2013%20c%20224%20§%2010); \]

## 46.25.085 - Hazardous materials endorsement.
1. The department may not issue, renew, upgrade, or transfer a hazardous materials endorsement for a commercial driver's license to any individual authorizing that individual to operate a commercial motor vehicle transporting a hazardous material in commerce unless the federal transportation security administration has determined that the individual does not pose a security risk warranting denial of the endorsement.

2. An individual who is prohibited from holding a commercial driver's license with a hazardous materials endorsement under 49 C.F.R. 1572.5 must surrender any hazardous materials endorsement in his or her possession to the department.

3. The department may adopt such rules as may be necessary to comply with the provisions of 49 C.F.R. part 1572.

\[ [2004 c 187 § 6](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/2003-04/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/House/2532-S.SL.pdf?cite=2004%20c%20187%20§%206); \]

## 46.25.088 - Expiration—Renewal.
1. A CDL expires in the same manner as provided in RCW 46.20.181.

2. When applying for renewal of a CDL, the applicant must:

    a. Complete the application form required under RCW 46.25.070(1), providing updated information and required certifications, and meet all the requirements of RCW 46.25.070 and 49 C.F.R. Sec. 383.71;

    b. Submit the application to the department in person; and

    c. If the applicant wishes to retain a hazardous materials endorsement, take and pass the written test for a hazardous materials endorsement.

\[ [2013 c 224 § 11](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/2013-14/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/House/1752-S.SL.pdf?cite=2013%20c%20224%20§%2011); \]

## 46.25.090 - Disqualification—Grounds for, period of—Records.
1. A person is disqualified from driving a commercial motor vehicle for a period of not less than one year if a report has been received by the department pursuant to RCW 46.20.308 or 46.25.120, or if the person has been convicted of a first violation, within this or any other jurisdiction, of:

    a. Driving a motor vehicle under the influence of alcohol or any drug;

    b. Driving a commercial motor vehicle while the alcohol concentration in the person's system is 0.04 or more or any measurable amount of THC concentration, or driving a noncommercial motor vehicle while the alcohol concentration in the person's system is 0.08 or more, or is 0.02 or more if the person is under age twenty-one, or with a THC concentration of 5.00 nanograms per milliliter of whole blood or more, or a THC concentration above 0.00 if the person is under the age of twenty-one, as determined by any testing methods approved by law in this state or any other state or jurisdiction;

    c. Leaving the scene of an accident involving a motor vehicle driven by the person;

    d. Using a motor vehicle in the commission of a felony;

    e. Refusing to submit to a test or tests to determine the driver's alcohol concentration or the presence of any drug while driving a motor vehicle;

    f. Driving a commercial motor vehicle when, as a result of prior violations committed while operating a commercial motor vehicle, the driver's commercial driver's license is revoked, suspended, or canceled, or the driver is disqualified from operating a commercial motor vehicle;

    g. Causing a fatality through the negligent operation of a commercial motor vehicle, including but not limited to the crimes of vehicular homicide and negligent homicide.

If any of the violations set forth in this subsection occurred while transporting hazardous material, the person is disqualified for a period of not less than three years.

2. A person is disqualified for life if it has been determined that the person has committed or has been convicted of two or more violations of any of the offenses specified in subsection (1) of this section, or any combination of those offenses, arising from two or more separate incidents.

3. The department may adopt rules, in accordance with federal regulations, establishing guidelines, including conditions, under which a disqualification for life under subsection (2) of this section may be reduced to a period of not less than ten years.

4. A person is disqualified from driving a commercial motor vehicle for life who uses a motor vehicle in the commission of a felony involving the manufacture, distribution, or dispensing of a controlled substance, as defined by chapter 69.50 RCW, or possession with intent to manufacture, distribute, or dispense a controlled substance, as defined by chapter 69.50 RCW.

5. [Empty]
    a. A person is disqualified from driving a commercial motor vehicle for a period of:

        i. Not less than sixty days if:

(A) Convicted of or found to have committed a second serious traffic violation while driving a commercial motor vehicle; or

(B) Convicted of reckless driving, where there has been a prior serious traffic violation; or

        ii. Not less than one hundred twenty days if:

(A) Convicted of or found to have committed a third or subsequent serious traffic violation while driving a commercial motor vehicle; or

(B) Convicted of reckless driving, where there has been two or more prior serious traffic violations.

    b. The disqualification period under (a)(ii) of this subsection must be in addition to any other previous period of disqualification.

    c. For purposes of determining prior serious traffic violations under this subsection, each conviction of or finding that a driver has committed a serious traffic violation while driving a commercial motor vehicle or noncommercial motor vehicle, arising from a separate incident occurring within a three-year period, must be counted.

6. A person is disqualified from driving a commercial motor vehicle for a period of:

    a. Not less than one hundred eighty days nor more than one year if convicted of or found to have committed a first violation of an out-of-service order while driving a commercial vehicle;

    b. Not less than two years nor more than five years if, during a ten-year period, the person is convicted of or is found to have committed two violations of out-of-service orders while driving a commercial motor vehicle in separate incidents;

    c. Not less than three years nor more than five years if, during a ten-year period, the person is convicted of or is found to have committed three or more violations of out-of-service orders while driving commercial motor vehicles in separate incidents;

    d. Not less than one hundred eighty days nor more than two years if the person is convicted of or is found to have committed a first violation of an out-of-service order while transporting hazardous materials, or while operating motor vehicles designed to transport sixteen or more passengers, including the driver. A person is disqualified for a period of not less than three years nor more than five years if, during a ten-year period, the person is convicted of or is found to have committed subsequent violations of out-of-service orders, in separate incidents, while transporting hazardous materials, or while operating motor vehicles designed to transport sixteen or more passengers, including the driver.

7. A person is disqualified from driving a commercial motor vehicle if a report has been received by the department under RCW 46.25.125 that the person has received a verified positive drug test or positive alcohol confirmation test as part of the testing program conducted under 49 C.F.R. 40. A disqualification under this subsection remains in effect until the person undergoes a drug and alcohol assessment by a substance abuse professional meeting the requirements of 49 C.F.R. 40, and the person presents evidence of satisfactory participation in or successful completion of a drug or alcohol treatment and/or education program as recommended by the substance abuse professional, and until the person has met the requirements of RCW 46.25.100. The substance abuse professional shall forward a diagnostic evaluation and treatment recommendation to the department of licensing for use in determining the person's eligibility for driving a commercial motor vehicle. Persons who are disqualified under this subsection more than twice in a five-year period are disqualified for life.

8. [Empty]
    a. A person is disqualified from driving a commercial motor vehicle for the period of time specified in (b) of this subsection if he or she is convicted of or is found to have committed one of the following six offenses at a railroad-highway grade crossing while operating a commercial motor vehicle in violation of a federal, state, or local law or regulation:

        i. For drivers who are not required to always stop, failing to slow down and check that the tracks are clear of an approaching train or other on-track equipment;

        ii. For drivers who are not required to always stop, failing to stop before reaching the crossing, if the tracks are not clear;

        iii. For drivers who are always required to stop, failing to stop before driving onto the crossing;

        iv. For all drivers, failing to have sufficient space to drive completely through the crossing without stopping;

    v. For all drivers, failing to obey a traffic control device or the directions of an enforcement officer at the crossing;

    vi. For all drivers, failing to negotiate a crossing because of insufficient undercarriage clearance.

    b. A person is disqualified from driving a commercial motor vehicle for a period of:

        i. Not less than sixty days if the driver is convicted of or is found to have committed a first violation of a railroad-highway grade crossing violation;

        ii. Not less than one hundred twenty days if the driver is convicted of or is found to have committed a second railroad-highway grade crossing violation in separate incidents within a three-year period;

        iii. Not less than one year if the driver is convicted of or is found to have committed a third or subsequent railroad-highway grade crossing violation in separate incidents within a three-year period.

9. A person is disqualified from driving a commercial motor vehicle for not more than one year if a report has been received by the department from the federal motor carrier safety administration that the person's driving has been determined to constitute an imminent hazard as defined by 49 C.F.R. 383.5. A person who is simultaneously disqualified from driving a commercial motor vehicle under this subsection and under other provisions of this chapter, or under 49 C.F.R. 383.52, shall serve those disqualification periods concurrently.

10. Within ten days after suspending, revoking, or canceling a commercial driver's license or disqualifying a driver from operating a commercial motor vehicle, the department shall update its records to reflect that action.

\[ [2017 c 87 § 5](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/2017-18/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/Senate/5227.SL.pdf?cite=2017%20c%2087%20§%205); [2013 2nd sp.s. c 35 § 10](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/2013-14/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/Senate/5912-S2.SL.pdf?cite=2013%202nd%20sp.s.%20c%2035%20§%2010); [2011 c 227 § 4](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/2011-12/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/House/1229.SL.pdf?cite=2011%20c%20227%20§%204); [2006 c 327 § 4](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/2005-06/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/Senate/6552-S.SL.pdf?cite=2006%20c%20327%20§%204); [2005 c 325 § 5](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/2005-06/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/House/1266-S.SL.pdf?cite=2005%20c%20325%20§%205); [2004 c 187 § 7](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/2003-04/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/House/2532-S.SL.pdf?cite=2004%20c%20187%20§%207); [2002 c 272 § 3](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/2001-02/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/Senate/6461-S.SL.pdf?cite=2002%20c%20272%20§%203); [2002 c 193 § 1](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/2001-02/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/House/2284.SL.pdf?cite=2002%20c%20193%20§%201); [1996 c 30 § 3](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/1995-96/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/Senate/6487-S.SL.pdf?cite=1996%20c%2030%20§%203); [1989 c 178 § 11](http://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1989c178.pdf?cite=1989%20c%20178%20§%2011); \]

## **46.25.100 - Restoration after disqualification—Requalification fee, fee distribution.**
1. When a person has been disqualified from operating a commercial motor vehicle, the person is not entitled to have the commercial driver's license or commercial learner's permit restored until after the expiration of the appropriate disqualification period required under RCW 46.25.090 or until the department has received a drug and alcohol assessment and evidence is presented of satisfactory participation in or completion of any required drug or alcohol treatment program for ending the disqualification under RCW 46.25.090(7). After expiration of the appropriate period and upon payment of a requalification fee of twenty dollars until June 30, 2016, and thirty-five dollars beginning July 1, 2016, or one hundred fifty dollars if the person has been disqualified under RCW 46.25.090(7), the person may apply for a new, duplicate, or renewal commercial driver's license or commercial learner's permit as provided by law. If the person has been disqualified for a period of one year or more, the person shall demonstrate that he or she meets the commercial driver's license or commercial learner's permit qualification standards specified in RCW 46.25.060.

2. The fees under this section must be deposited into the highway safety fund unless prior to July 1, 2023, the actions described in (a) or (b) of this subsection occur, in which case the portion of the revenue that is the result of the fee increased in section 208, chapter 44, Laws of 2015 3rd sp. sess. must be distributed to the connecting Washington account created under RCW 46.68.395.

    a. Any state agency files a notice of rule making under chapter 34.05 RCW**, absent explicit legislative authorization enacted subsequent to July 1, 2015,** for a rule regarding a fuel standard based upon or defined by the carbon intensity of fuel, including a low carbon fuel standard or clean fuel standard.

    b. Any state agency otherwise enacts, adopts, orders, or in any way implements a fuel standard based upon or defined by the carbon intensity of fuel, including a low carbon fuel standard or clean fuel standard**, without explicit legislative authorization enacted subsequent to July 1, 2015**.

    c. Nothing in this subsection acknowledges, establishes, or creates legal authority for the department of ecology or any other state agency to enact, adopt, order, or in any way implement a fuel standard based upon or defined by the carbon intensity of fuel, including a low carbon fuel standard or clean fuel standard.

## 46.25.110 - Driving with alcohol or THC in system.
1. Notwithstanding any other provision of Title 46 RCW, a person may not drive, operate, or be in physical control of a commercial motor vehicle while having alcohol or THC in his or her system.

2. Law enforcement or appropriate officials shall issue an out-of-service order valid for twenty-four hours against a person who drives, operates, or is in physical control of a commercial motor vehicle while having alcohol or THC in his or her system or who refuses to take a test to determine his or her alcohol content or THC concentration as provided by RCW 46.25.120.

\[ [2013 2nd sp.s. c 35 § 11](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/2013-14/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/Senate/5912-S2.SL.pdf?cite=2013%202nd%20sp.s.%20c%2035%20§%2011); [1989 c 178 § 13](http://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1989c178.pdf?cite=1989%20c%20178%20§%2013); \]

## 46.25.120 - Test for alcohol or drugs—Disqualification for refusal of test or positive test—Procedures.
1. A person who drives a commercial motor vehicle within this state is deemed to have given consent, subject to RCW 46.61.506, to take a test or tests of that person's breath for the purpose of determining that person's alcohol concentration.

2. A test or tests may be administered at the direction of a law enforcement officer, who after stopping or detaining the commercial motor vehicle driver, has reasonable grounds to believe that driver was driving a commercial motor vehicle while having alcohol in his or her system or while under the influence of any drug.

3. The law enforcement officer requesting the test under subsection (1) of this section shall warn the person requested to submit to the test that a refusal to submit will result in that person being disqualified from operating a commercial motor vehicle under RCW 46.25.090.

4. A law enforcement officer who at the time of stopping or detaining a commercial motor vehicle driver has reasonable grounds to believe that driver was driving a commercial motor vehicle while having alcohol, marijuana, or any drug in his or her system or while under the influence of alcohol, marijuana, or any drug may obtain a blood test pursuant to a search warrant, a valid waiver of the warrant requirement, when exigent circumstances exist, or under any other authority of law.

5. If the person refuses testing, or a test is administered that discloses an alcohol concentration of 0.04 or more or any measurable amount of THC concentration, the law enforcement officer shall submit a sworn report to the department certifying that the test was requested pursuant to subsection (1) of this section or a blood test was administered pursuant to subsection (4) of this section and that the person refused to submit to testing, or a test was administered that disclosed an alcohol concentration of 0.04 or more or any measurable amount of THC concentration.

6. Upon receipt of the sworn report of a law enforcement officer under subsection (5) of this section, the department shall disqualify the driver from driving a commercial motor vehicle under RCW 46.25.090, subject to the hearing provisions of RCW 46.20.329 and 46.20.332. The hearing shall be conducted in the county of the arrest. For the purposes of this section, the hearing shall cover the issues of whether a law enforcement officer had reasonable grounds to believe the person had been driving or was in actual physical control of a commercial motor vehicle within this state while having alcohol in the person's system or while under the influence of any drug, whether the person refused to submit to the test or tests upon request of the officer after having been informed that the refusal would result in the disqualification of the person from driving a commercial motor vehicle, if applicable, and, if the test was administered, whether the results indicated an alcohol concentration of 0.04 percent or more or any measurable amount of THC concentration. The department shall order that the disqualification of the person either be rescinded or sustained. Any decision by the department disqualifying a person from driving a commercial motor vehicle is stayed and does not take effect while a formal hearing is pending under this section or during the pendency of a subsequent appeal to superior court so long as there is no conviction for a moving violation or no finding that the person has committed a traffic infraction that is a moving violation during the pendency of the hearing and appeal. If the disqualification of the person is sustained after the hearing, the person who is disqualified may file a petition in the superior court of the county of arrest to review the final order of disqualification by the department in the manner provided in RCW 46.20.334.

7. If a motor carrier or employer who is required to have a testing program under 49 C.F.R. 382 knows that a commercial driver in his or her employ has refused to submit to testing under this section and has not been disqualified from driving a commercial motor vehicle, the employer may notify law enforcement or his or her medical review officer or breath alcohol technician that the driver has refused to submit to the required testing.

8. The hearing provisions of this section do not apply to those persons disqualified from driving a commercial motor vehicle under RCW 46.25.090(7).

\[ [2015 2nd sp.s. c 3 § 7](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/2015-16/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/House/1276-S2.SL.pdf?cite=2015%202nd%20sp.s.%20c%203%20§%207); [2013 2nd sp.s. c 35 § 12](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/2013-14/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/Senate/5912-S2.SL.pdf?cite=2013%202nd%20sp.s.%20c%2035%20§%2012); [2006 c 327 § 5](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/2005-06/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/Senate/6552-S.SL.pdf?cite=2006%20c%20327%20§%205); [2002 c 272 § 5](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/2001-02/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/Senate/6461-S.SL.pdf?cite=2002%20c%20272%20§%205); [1998 c 41 § 6](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/1997-98/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/House/1501-S2.SL.pdf?cite=1998%20c%2041%20§%206); [1990 c 250 § 50](http://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1990c250.pdf?cite=1990%20c%20250%20§%2050); [1989 c 178 § 14](http://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1989c178.pdf?cite=1989%20c%20178%20§%2014); \]

## 46.25.123 - Mandatory reporting of positive test.
1. All medical review officers or breath alcohol technicians hired by or under contract to a motor carrier or employer who employs drivers who operate commercial motor vehicles and who is required to have a testing program conducted under the procedures established by 49 C.F.R. 40 or to a consortium the carrier or employer belongs to, as defined in 49 C.F.R. 40.3, shall report the finding of a commercial motor vehicle driver's verified positive drug test or positive alcohol confirmation test to the department of licensing on a form provided by the department. If the employer is required to have a testing program under 49 C.F.R. 655, a report of a verified positive drug test or positive alcohol confirmation test must not be forwarded to the department under this subsection unless the test is a preemployment drug test conducted under 49 C.F.R. 655.41 or a preemployment alcohol test conducted under 49 C.F.R. 655.42.

2. [Empty]
    a. A motor carrier or employer who employs drivers who operate commercial motor vehicles and who is required to have a testing program conducted under the procedures established by 49 C.F.R. 40, or the consortium the carrier or employer belongs to, must report a refusal by a commercial motor vehicle driver to take a drug or alcohol test, under circumstances that constitute the refusal of a test under 49 C.F.R. 40 and where such refusal has not been reported by a medical review officer or breath alcohol technician, to the department of licensing on a form provided by the department.

    b. An employer who is required to have a testing program under 49 C.F.R. 655 must report a commercial motor vehicle driver's verified positive drug test or a positive alcohol confirmation test when: (i) The driver's employment has been terminated or the driver has resigned; (ii) any grievance process, up to but not including arbitration, has been concluded; and (iii) at the time of termination or resignation the driver has not been cleared to return to safety-sensitive functions.

3. Motor carriers, employers, or consortiums shall make it a written condition of their contract or agreement with a medical review officer or breath alcohol technician, regardless of the state where the medical review officer or breath alcohol technician is located, that the medical review officer or breath alcohol technician is required to report all Washington state licensed drivers who have a verified positive drug test or positive alcohol confirmation test to the department of licensing within three business days of the verification or confirmation. Failure to obtain this contractual condition or agreement with the medical review officer or breath alcohol technician by the motor carrier, employer, or consortium, or failure to report a refusal as required by subsection (2) of this section, will result in an administrative fine as provided in RCW 46.32.100 or 81.04.405.

4. Substances obtained for testing may not be used for any purpose other than drug or alcohol testing under 49 C.F.R. 40.

\[ [2005 c 325 § 3](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/2005-06/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/House/1266-S.SL.pdf?cite=2005%20c%20325%20§%203); [2002 c 272 § 1](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/2001-02/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/Senate/6461-S.SL.pdf?cite=2002%20c%20272%20§%201); \]

## 46.25.125 - Disqualification for positive test—Procedure.
1. When the department of licensing receives a report from a medical review officer, breath alcohol technician, employer, contractor, or consortium that a driver has a verified positive drug test or positive alcohol confirmation test, as part of the testing program conducted under 49 C.F.R. 40, the department shall disqualify the driver from driving a commercial motor vehicle under RCW 46.25.090(7) subject to a hearing as provided in this section. The department shall notify the person in writing of the disqualification by first-class mail. The notice must explain the procedure for the person to request a hearing.

2. A person disqualified from driving a commercial motor vehicle for having a verified positive drug test or positive alcohol confirmation test may request a hearing to challenge the disqualification within twenty days from the date notice is given. If the request for a hearing is mailed, it must be postmarked within twenty days after the department has given notice of the disqualification.

3. The hearing must be conducted in the county of the person's residence, except that the department may conduct all or part of the hearing by telephone or other electronic means.

4. For the purposes of this section, or for the purpose of a hearing de novo in an appeal to superior court, the hearing must be limited to the following issues: (a) Whether the driver is the person who is the subject of the report; (b) whether the motor carrier, employer, or consortium has a program that is subject to the federal requirements under 49 C.F.R. 40; and (c) whether the medical review officer or breath alcohol technician making the report accurately followed the protocols established to verify or confirm the results, or if the driver refused a test, whether the circumstances constitute the refusal of a test under 49 C.F.R. 40. Evidence may be presented to demonstrate that the test results are a false positive. For the purpose of a hearing under this section, a copy of a positive test result with a declaration by the tester or medical review officer or breath alcohol technician stating the accuracy of the laboratory protocols followed to arrive at the test result is prima facie evidence:

        i. Of a verified positive drug test or positive alcohol confirmation test result;

        ii. That the motor carrier, employer, or consortium has a program that is subject to the federal requirements under 49 C.F.R. 40; and

        iii. That the medical review officer or breath alcohol technician making the report accurately followed the protocols for testing established to verify or confirm the results.

After the hearing, the department shall order the disqualification of the person either be rescinded or sustained.

5. If the person does not request a hearing within the twenty-day time limit, or if the person fails to appear at a hearing, the person has waived the right to a hearing and the department shall sustain the disqualification.

6. A decision by the department disqualifying a person from driving a commercial motor vehicle is stayed and does not take effect while a formal hearing is pending under this section or during the pendency of a subsequent appeal to superior court so long as there is no conviction for a moving violation or no finding that the person has committed a traffic infraction that is a moving violation and the department receives no further report of a verified positive drug test or positive alcohol confirmation test during the pendency of the hearing and appeal. If the disqualification is sustained after the hearing, the person who is disqualified may file a petition in the superior court of the county of his or her residence to review the final order of disqualification by the department in the manner provided in RCW 46.20.334.

7. The department of licensing may adopt rules specifying further requirements for requesting and conducting a hearing under this section.

8. The department of licensing is not civilly liable for damage resulting from disqualifying a driver based on a verified positive drug test or positive alcohol confirmation test result as required by this section or for damage resulting from release of this information that occurs in the normal course of business.

\[ [2005 c 325 § 4](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/2005-06/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/House/1266-S.SL.pdf?cite=2005%20c%20325%20§%204); [2002 c 272 § 2](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/2001-02/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/Senate/6461-S.SL.pdf?cite=2002%20c%20272%20§%202); \]

## 46.25.130 - Report of violation, disqualification by nonresident.
1. Within ten days after receiving a report of the conviction of or finding that a traffic infraction has been committed by any nonresident holder of a commercial driver's license or commercial learner's permit, or any nonresident operating a commercial motor vehicle, for any violation of state law or local ordinance relating to motor vehicle traffic control, other than parking violations, the department shall notify the driver licensing authority in the licensing state of the conviction.

2. [Empty]
    a. No later than ten days after disqualifying any nonresident holder of a commercial driver's license or commercial learner's permit from operating a commercial motor vehicle, or revoking, suspending, or canceling the nonresident driving privileges of the nonresident holder of a commercial driver's license or commercial learner's permit for at least sixty days, the department must notify the state that issued the license of the disqualification, revocation, suspension, or cancellation.

    b. The notification must include both the disqualification and the violation that resulted in the disqualification, revocation, suspension, or cancellation. The notification and the information it provides must be recorded on the driver's record.

\[ [2013 c 224 § 13](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/2013-14/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/House/1752-S.SL.pdf?cite=2013%20c%20224%20§%2013); [2004 c 187 § 8](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/2003-04/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/House/2532-S.SL.pdf?cite=2004%20c%20187%20§%208); [1989 c 178 § 15](http://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1989c178.pdf?cite=1989%20c%20178%20§%2015); \]

## 46.25.140 - Rules.
The department may adopt rules necessary to carry out this chapter.

\[ [1989 c 178 § 16](http://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1989c178.pdf?cite=1989%20c%20178%20§%2016); \]

## 46.25.150 - Agreements to carry out chapter.
The department may enter into or make agreements, arrangements, or declarations to carry out this chapter.

\[ [1989 c 178 § 17](http://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1989c178.pdf?cite=1989%20c%20178%20§%2017); \]

## 46.25.160 - Licenses issued by other jurisdictions.
Notwithstanding any law to the contrary, a person may drive a commercial motor vehicle if the person has a commercial driver's license or commercial learner's permit issued by any state or jurisdiction in accordance with the minimum federal standards for the issuance of commercial motor vehicle driver's licenses or permits, if the person's license or permit is not suspended, revoked, or canceled, and if the person is not disqualified from driving a commercial motor vehicle or is subject to an out-of-service order.

\[ [2013 c 224 § 14](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/2013-14/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/House/1752-S.SL.pdf?cite=2013%20c%20224%20§%2014); [2004 c 187 § 9](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/2003-04/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/House/2532-S.SL.pdf?cite=2004%20c%20187%20§%209); [1989 c 178 § 18](http://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1989c178.pdf?cite=1989%20c%20178%20§%2018); \]

## 46.25.170 - Civil and criminal penalties.
1. A person subject to RCW 81.04.405 who is determined by the utilities and transportation commission, after notice, to have committed an act that is in violation of RCW 46.25.020, 46.25.030, 46.25.040, 46.25.050, or 46.25.110 is liable to Washington state for the civil penalties provided for in RCW 81.04.405.

2. A person who violates or fails to comply with, or who procures, aids, or abets in the violation of any provision of RCW 46.25.020, 46.25.030, 46.25.040, 46.25.050, or 46.25.110 is guilty of a gross misdemeanor.

\[ [1989 c 178 § 19](http://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1989c178.pdf?cite=1989%20c%20178%20§%2019); \]

## 46.25.901 - Effective dates—1989 c 178.
Sections 25, 26, 28, and 32 of this act shall take effect on April 1, 1992. The remainder of this act shall take effect on October 1, 1989. The director of licensing may immediately take such steps as are necessary to insure that all sections of this act are implemented on their respective effective dates.

\[ [1989 c 178 § 33](http://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1989c178.pdf?cite=1989%20c%20178%20§%2033); \]

