# House Bill 1337

[Source](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/2021-22/Xml/Bills/House%20Bills/1337.xml)
## Section 1
(1) The legislature makes the following findings:
(a) Washington state is experiencing a housing affordability crisis. Many communities across the state are in need of more housing for renters across the income spectrum.
(b) Many cities dedicate the majority of residentially zoned land to single-detached houses that are increasingly financially out of reach for many households. Due to their smaller size, accessory dwelling units can provide a more affordable housing option in those single-family zones.
(c) Localities can start to correct for historic economic and racial exclusion in single-family zones by opening up these neighborhoods to more diverse housing types, including accessory dwelling units, that provide lower cost homes. Increasing housing options in expensive, high-opportunity neighborhoods will give more families access to schools, parks, and other public amenities otherwise accessible to only the wealthy.
(d) Accessory dwelling units are frequently rented below market rate, providing additional affordable housing options for renters.
(e) Accessory dwelling units can also help to provide housing for very low-income households. More than 10 percent of accessory dwelling units in some areas are occupied by tenants who pay no rent at all; among these tenants are grandparents, adult children, family members with disabilities, friends going through life transitions, and community members in need. Accessory dwelling units meet the needs of these people who might otherwise require subsidized housing space and resources.
(f) Accessory dwelling units can meet the needs of Washington's growing senior population, making it possible for this population to age in their communities by offering senior-friendly housing, which prioritizes physical accessibility, in walkable communities near amenities essential to successful aging in place, including transit and grocery stores, without requiring costly renovations of existing housing stock.
(g) Homeowners who add an accessory dwelling unit may benefit from added income and an increased sense of security.
(h) Encouraging localities to adopt measures that spur accessory dwelling unit construction would create jobs as the state recovers from the COVID-19 economic shutdown.
(i) Accessory dwelling units provide environmental benefits. On average they are more energy efficient than single-detached houses, and they incentivize adaptive reuse of existing homes and materials.
(j) Siting accessory dwelling units near transit hubs, employment centers, and public amenities can help to reduce greenhouse gas emissions by increasing walkability, shortening household commutes, and curtailing sprawl.
(2) The legislature intends to promote and encourage the creation of accessory dwelling units as a means to address the need for additional affordable housing options.
(3) The legislature intends to accelerate production of accessory dwelling units by offering local governments the equivalent of the state's portion of sales tax generated by accessory dwelling unit construction in their jurisdiction, if they adopt state-approved model code requirements for accessory dwelling units. This program will be assisted by the department of commerce, which will verify the amount of new accessory dwelling unit construction that has occurred.

## Section 2
> This section modifies existing section [36.70A.696](/rcw/36_counties/36.070A_growth_management—planning_by_selected_counties_and_cities.md). Here is the [modified chapter](rcw/36_counties/36.070A_growth_management—planning_by_selected_counties_and_cities.md) for context.

The definitions in this section apply throughout RCW 36.70A.697 **,** 36.70A.698**, and sections 3 and 4 of this act** unless the context clearly requires otherwise.

1. "Accessory dwelling unit" means a dwelling unit located on the same lot as a single-family housing unit, duplex, triplex, townhome, or other housing unit.

2. "Attached accessory dwelling unit" means an accessory dwelling unit located within or attached to a single-family housing unit, duplex, triplex, townhome, or other housing unit.

3. "City" means any city, code city, and town located in a county planning under RCW 36.70A.040.

4. "Detached accessory dwelling unit" means an accessory dwelling unit that consists partly or entirely of a building that is separate and detached from a single-family housing unit, duplex, triplex, townhome, or other housing unit.

5. "Dwelling unit" means a residential living unit that provides complete independent living facilities for one or more persons and that includes permanent provisions for living, sleeping, eating, cooking, and sanitation.

6. **"Gross floor area" means the interior habitable area of a dwelling unit including basements and attics but not including a garage or accessory structure.**

7. "Major transit stop" means:

    a. A stop on a high capacity transportation system funded or expanded under the provisions of chapter 81.104 RCW;

    b. Commuter rail stops;

    c. Stops on rail or fixed guideway systems, including transitways;

    d. Stops on bus rapid transit routes or routes that run on high occupancy vehicle lanes; or

    e. Stops for a bus or other transit mode providing fixed route service at intervals of at least fifteen minutes during the peak hours of operation.

8. **"Principal unit" means the single-family housing unit, duplex, triplex, townhome, or other housing unit located on the same lot as an accessory dwelling unit.**


## Section 5
> This section modifies existing section [43.21C.495](/rcw/43_state_government—executive/43.021C_state_environmental_policy.md). Here is the [modified chapter](rcw/43_state_government—executive/43.021C_state_environmental_policy.md) for context.

1. If adopted by April 1, 2023, amendments to development regulations and other nonproject actions taken by a city to implement RCW 36.70A.600 (1) or (4), with the exception of the action specified in RCW 36.70A.600(1)(f), are not subject to administrative or judicial appeals under this chapter.

2. **Amendments to development regulations and other nonproject actions taken by a covered city or county consistent with the requirements of sections 3 and 4 of this act are not subject to administrative or judicial appeals under this chapter.**

