# 16.10 - Dogs—Licensing—Dog control zones.
* [16.10.010 - Purpose.](#1610010---purpose)
* [16.10.020 - Dog control zones—Determination of need by county commissioners.](#1610020---dog-control-zonesdetermination-of-need-by-county-commissioners)
* [16.10.030 - Dog control zones—Public hearing, publication of notice.](#1610030---dog-control-zonespublic-hearing-publication-of-notice)
* [16.10.040 - Dog control zones—Regulations—License fees, collection, disposition.](#1610040---dog-control-zonesregulationslicense-fees-collection-disposition)
## 16.10.010 - Purpose.
The purpose of this chapter is to provide for the licensing of dogs within specific areas of particular counties.

\[ [1969 c 72 § 1](https://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1969c72.pdf?cite=1969%20c%2072%20§%201); \]

## 16.10.020 - Dog control zones—Determination of need by county commissioners.
County commissioners may, if the situation so requires, establish dog control zones within high density population districts, or other specified areas, of a county outside the corporate limits of any city, and outside the corporate limits of any organized township. For such zones, licensing regulations may be established which shall not necessarily be operative in sparsely settled rural districts, or in other portions of the county where they may not be needed. In determining the need for such zones, and in drawing their boundaries, county commissioners shall take into consideration the following factors:

1. The density of population in the area proposed to be zoned;

2. Zoning regulations, if any, in force in the area proposed to be zoned;

3. The public health, safety and welfare within the area proposed to be zoned.

If the commissioners shall find that the area proposed to be zoned is heavily populated, or that the purposes for which the land is being used therein require that dogs be controlled, or that the health, safety, and welfare of the people in the area require such control, they may propose the establishment of a dog control zone.

\[ [1969 c 72 § 2](https://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1969c72.pdf?cite=1969%20c%2072%20§%202); \]

## 16.10.030 - Dog control zones—Public hearing, publication of notice.
In determining whether a dog control zone should be established, the county commissioners shall call a public hearing, notice of which shall be published once a week for each of four consecutive weeks prior thereto in a newspaper of general circulation within the proposed zone. At such a hearing, proponents and opponents of the proposed dog control zone may appear and present their views. The final decision of the commissioners with respect to the establishment of such a zone shall not be made until the conclusion of the hearing.

\[ [1969 c 72 § 3](https://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1969c72.pdf?cite=1969%20c%2072%20§%203); \]

## 16.10.040 - Dog control zones—Regulations—License fees, collection, disposition.
The county commissioners shall by ordinance promulgate the regulations to be enforced within a dog control zone. These shall include provisions for the control of unlicensed dogs and the establishment of license fees. The county sheriff and/or other agencies designated by the county commissioners shall be responsible for the enforcement of the act, including the collection of license fees. Fees collected shall be transferred to the current expense fund of each county.

\[ [1969 c 72 § 4](https://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1969c72.pdf?cite=1969%20c%2072%20§%204); \]

