# 16.38 - Livestock diseases—Diagnostic service program.
* [16.38.010 - Declaration of purpose.](#1638010---declaration-of-purpose)
* [16.38.020 - Director authorized to carry on diagnostic program.](#1638020---director-authorized-to-carry-on-diagnostic-program)
* [16.38.030 - Employment of personnel.](#1638030---employment-of-personnel)
* [16.38.040 - Agreements and/or contracts with other entities.](#1638040---agreements-andor-contracts-with-other-entities)
* [16.38.050 - Acceptance of gifts, funds, equipment, etc.](#1638050---acceptance-of-gifts-funds-equipment-etc)
* [16.38.060 - Schedule of fees may be established—Use.](#1638060---schedule-of-fees-may-be-establisheduse)
## 16.38.010 - Declaration of purpose.
The production of livestock is one of the largest industries in this state; and whereas livestock disease constitutes a constant threat to the public health and the production of livestock in this state; and whereas the prevention and control of such livestock diseases by the state may be best carried on by the establishment of a diagnostic service program for livestock diseases; therefore it is in the public interest and for the purpose of protecting health and general welfare that a livestock diagnostic service program be established.

\[ [1969 c 100 § 1](https://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1969c100.pdf?cite=1969%20c%20100%20§%201); \]

## 16.38.020 - Director authorized to carry on diagnostic program.
The director of agriculture is hereby authorized to carry on a diagnostic service program for the purpose of diagnosing any livestock disease which affects or may affect any livestock which is or may be produced in this state or otherwise handled in any manner for public distribution or consumption.

\[ [1969 c 100 § 2](https://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1969c100.pdf?cite=1969%20c%20100%20§%202); \]

## 16.38.030 - Employment of personnel.
In carrying out such diagnostic service program the director of agriculture may employ, subject to the state civil service act, chapter 41.06 RCW, the necessary personnel to properly effectuate such diagnostic service program.

\[ [1969 c 100 § 3](https://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1969c100.pdf?cite=1969%20c%20100%20§%203); \]

## 16.38.040 - Agreements and/or contracts with other entities.
In carrying out such diagnostic service program the director of agriculture may enter into agreements and/or contracts with any other governmental agencies whether state or federal or public institution such as Washington State University or private institutions and/or research organizations.

\[ [1969 c 100 § 4](https://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1969c100.pdf?cite=1969%20c%20100%20§%204); \]

## 16.38.050 - Acceptance of gifts, funds, equipment, etc.
In carrying out such diagnostic service program, the director of agriculture may accept public or private funds, gifts or equipment or any other necessary properties.

\[ [1969 c 100 § 5](https://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1969c100.pdf?cite=1969%20c%20100%20§%205); \]

## 16.38.060 - Schedule of fees may be established—Use.
The director may, following a public hearing, establish a schedule of fees for services performed in carrying out such diagnostic service program. All fees collected under this provision shall be retained by the director of agriculture to be spent only for carrying out the purposes of this chapter.

\[ [1986 c 203 § 6](https://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1986c203.pdf?cite=1986%20c%20203%20§%206); [1969 c 100 § 6](https://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1969c100.pdf?cite=1969%20c%20100%20§%206); \]

