# 16.54 - Abandoned animals.
* [16.54.010 - When deemed abandoned.](#1654010---when-deemed-abandoned)
* [16.54.020 - Disposition of abandoned animal by person having custody.](#1654020---disposition-of-abandoned-animal-by-person-having-custody)
* [16.54.030 - Duty of sheriff—Sale—Disposition of proceeds.](#1654030---duty-of-sheriffsaledisposition-of-proceeds)
## 16.54.010 - When deemed abandoned.
An animal is deemed to be abandoned under the provisions of this chapter when it is placed in the custody of a veterinarian, boarding kennel owner, or any person for treatment, board, or care and:

1. Having been placed in such custody for an unspecified period of time the animal is not removed within fifteen days after notice to remove the animal has been given to the person who placed the animal in such custody or having been so notified the person depositing the animal refuses or fails to pay agreed upon or reasonable charges for the treatment, board, or care of such animal, or;

2. Having been placed in such custody for a specified period of time the animal is not removed at the end of such specified period or the person depositing the animal refuses to pay agreed upon or reasonable charges for the treatment, board, or care of such animal.

\[ [1977 ex.s. c 67 § 1](https://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1977ex1c67.pdf?cite=1977%20ex.s.%20c%2067%20§%201); [1955 c 190 § 1](https://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1955c190.pdf?cite=1955%20c%20190%20§%201); \]

## 16.54.020 - Disposition of abandoned animal by person having custody.
Any person having in his or her care, custody, or control any abandoned animal as defined in RCW 16.54.010, may deliver such animal to any animal care and control agency as defined in RCW 16.52.011 or to an animal rescue group as defined in RCW 82.04.040 having the facilities and resources necessary for the care of such animals. If such an animal care and control agency or animal rescue group cannot reasonably be identified to receive the animal, the person with whom the animal was abandoned may notify the sheriff of the county wherein the abandonment occurred.

\[ [2020 c 158 § 8](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/2019-20/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/Senate/6300-S.SL.pdf?cite=2020%20c%20158%20§%208); [2011 c 336 § 425](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/2011-12/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/Senate/5045.SL.pdf?cite=2011%20c%20336%20§%20425); [1955 c 190 § 2](https://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1955c190.pdf?cite=1955%20c%20190%20§%202); \]

## 16.54.030 - Duty of sheriff—Sale—Disposition of proceeds.
It shall be the duty of the sheriff of such county upon being so notified, to dispose of such animal as provided by law in reference to estrays if such law is applicable to the animal abandoned, or if not so applicable then deliver such an animal to any animal care and control agency as defined in RCW 16.52.011 or to an animal rescue group as defined in RCW 82.04.040 having the facilities and resources necessary for the care of such an animal. If such an animal care and control agency or animal rescue group cannot reasonably be identified to receive the animal, then such an animal shall be sold by the sheriff at public auction. Notice of any such sale shall be given by posting a notice in three public places in the county at least ten days prior to such public sale. Proceeds of such sale shall be paid to the county treasurer for deposit in the county general fund.

\[ [2020 c 158 § 9](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/2019-20/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/Senate/6300-S.SL.pdf?cite=2020%20c%20158%20§%209); [1955 c 190 § 3](https://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1955c190.pdf?cite=1955%20c%20190%20§%203); \]

