# 16.76 - Wolf-livestock management.
* [16.76.005 - Finding.](#1676005---finding)
* [16.76.010 - Definitions.](#1676010---definitions)
* [16.76.020 - Northeast Washington wolf-livestock management grant—Advisory board—Distribution of funds—List of grants awarded.](#1676020---northeast-washington-wolf-livestock-management-grantadvisory-boarddistribution-of-fundslist-of-grants-awarded)
* [16.76.030 - Northeast Washington wolf-livestock management account.](#1676030---northeast-washington-wolf-livestock-management-account)
## 16.76.005 - Finding.
The legislature finds that there is a need to provide resources to help livestock producers adapt their operations in light of the recovery of wolves on the landscape and a desire by many to increase use of nonlethal deterrence measures to reduce the probability of livestock depredations by wolves. The application of resources in support of these goals must respect livestock producers' values of independence, privacy, and local decision making. The legislature further recognizes that the recent recolonization of wolves places a relatively large time and monetary burden on livestock producers, and that livestock producers have unique and valuable knowledge, occupy an important place in their local communities and the state's social fabric, and are critical partners in creating sound natural resource policies.

\[ [2017 c 257 § 1](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/2017-18/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/House/2126-S.SL.pdf?cite=2017%20c%20257%20§%201); \]

## 16.76.010 - Definitions.
The definitions in this section apply throughout this chapter unless the context clearly requires otherwise.

1. "Department" means the department of agriculture.

2. "Director" means the director of the department of agriculture.

3. "Northeast Washington" means Okanogan, Ferry, Stevens, and Pend Oreille counties.

\[ [2017 c 257 § 2](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/2017-18/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/House/2126-S.SL.pdf?cite=2017%20c%20257%20§%202); \]

## 16.76.020 - Northeast Washington wolf-livestock management grant—Advisory board—Distribution of funds—List of grants awarded.
1. The northeast Washington wolf-livestock management grant is created within the department. Funds from the grant program must be used only for the deployment of nonlethal deterrence resources in any Washington county east of the crest of the Cascade mountain range that shares a border with Canada, including human presence, and locally owned and deliberately located equipment and tools.

2. [Empty]

    a.  A four-member advisory board is established to advise the department on the expenditure of the northeast Washington wolf-livestock management grant funds. Advisory board members must be knowledgeable about wolf depredation issues, and have a special interest in the use of nonlethal wolf management techniques. Board members are unpaid, are not state employees, and are not eligible for reimbursement for subsistence, lodging, or travel expenses incurred in the performance of their duties as board members. The director must appoint each member to the board for a term of two years. Board members may be reappointed for subsequent two-year terms. The following board members must be appointed by the director in consultation with each applicable conservation district and the legislators in the legislative district encompassing each county:

        i.  One Ferry county conservation district board member or staff member;

        ii.  One Stevens county conservation district board member or staff member;

        iii.  One Pend Oreille conservation district board member or staff member; and

        iv.  One Okanogan conservation district board member or staff member.

    b.  If no board member or staff member qualifies under this section, the director must appoint a resident of the applicable county to serve on the board.

    c.  Board members may not:

        i.  Directly benefit, in whole or in part, from any contract entered into or grant awarded under this section; or

        ii.  Directly accept any compensation, gratuity, or reward in connection with such a contract from any other person with a beneficial interest in the contract.

3. The board must help direct funding for the deployment of nonlethal deterrence resources, including human presence, and locally owned and deliberately located equipment and tools. Funds may only be distributed to nonprofit community-based collaborative organizations that have advisory boards that include personnel from relevant agencies including, but not limited to, the United States forest service and the Washington department of fish and wildlife.

4. To ensure accountability and efficient use of funds between agencies involved in wolf-livestock management, the department must maintain a list of grants awarded under this section and at least annually share the list with the department of fish and wildlife.

\[ [2019 c 450 § 4](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/2019-20/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/House/2097-S.SL.pdf?cite=2019%20c%20450%20§%204); [2017 c 257 § 3](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/2017-18/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/House/2126-S.SL.pdf?cite=2017%20c%20257%20§%203); \]

## 16.76.030 - Northeast Washington wolf-livestock management account.
1. The northeast Washington wolf-livestock management account is created as a nonappropriated account in the custody of the state treasurer. All receipts, any legislative appropriations, private donations, or any other private or public source directed to the northeast Washington wolf-livestock management grant must be deposited into the account. Expenditures from the account may be used only for the deployment of nonlethal wolf deterrence resources as described in RCW 16.76.020. Only the director may authorize expenditures from the account in consultation with the advisory board created in RCW 16.76.020. The account is subject to allotment procedures under chapter 43.88 RCW, but an appropriation is not required for expenditures. Interest earned by deposits in the account must be retained in the account.

2. The advisory board created in RCW 16.76.020 may solicit and receive gifts and grants from public and private sources for the purposes of RCW 16.76.020.

3. During the 2021-2023 fiscal biennium, expenditures from the account may be used for wolf-livestock management as well as for grants to the sheriffs' offices of Stevens and Ferry counties for providing a local wildlife specialist to aid the department of fish and wildlife in the management of wolves.

\[ [2021 c 334 § 960](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/2021-22/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/Senate/5092-S.SL.pdf?cite=2021%20c%20334%20§%20960); [2017 c 257 § 4](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/2017-18/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/House/2126-S.SL.pdf?cite=2017%20c%20257%20§%204); \]

