# 47.36 - Traffic control devices.
* [47.36.005 - Definitions.](#4736005---definitions)
* [47.36.010 - Restoration of United States survey markers.](#4736010---restoration-of-united-states-survey-markers)
* [47.36.020 - Traffic control signals.](#4736020---traffic-control-signals)
* [47.36.022 - Traffic control signals—Duration of yellow change interval.](#4736022---traffic-control-signalsduration-of-yellow-change-interval)
* [47.36.025 - Vehicle-activated traffic control signals—Detection of motorcycles and bicycles.](#4736025---vehicle-activated-traffic-control-signalsdetection-of-motorcycles-and-bicycles)
* [47.36.030 - Traffic control devices—Specifications to counties and cities—Signs, banners over highways.](#4736030---traffic-control-devicesspecifications-to-counties-and-citiessigns-banners-over-highways)
* [47.36.040 - Furnished by department, paid for by counties and cities.](#4736040---furnished-by-department-paid-for-by-counties-and-cities)
* [47.36.050 - Duty to erect traffic devices on state highways and railroad crossings.](#4736050---duty-to-erect-traffic-devices-on-state-highways-and-railroad-crossings)
* [47.36.053 - General duty to place and maintain traffic devices on state highways and railroad crossings.](#4736053---general-duty-to-place-and-maintain-traffic-devices-on-state-highways-and-railroad-crossings)
* [47.36.060 - Traffic devices on county roads and city streets.](#4736060---traffic-devices-on-county-roads-and-city-streets)
* [47.36.070 - Failure to erect signs, procedure.](#4736070---failure-to-erect-signs-procedure)
* [47.36.080 - Signs at railroad crossings.](#4736080---signs-at-railroad-crossings)
* [47.36.090 - Cooperation with United States on road markers.](#4736090---cooperation-with-united-states-on-road-markers)
* [47.36.095 - Highway designation system—Signs.](#4736095---highway-designation-systemsigns)
* [47.36.097 - Highway designation system—Filing.](#4736097---highway-designation-systemfiling)
* [47.36.100 - Directional, caution, and stop signs.](#4736100---directional-caution-and-stop-signs)
* [47.36.110 - Stop signs, "Yield" signs—Duties of persons using highway.](#4736110---stop-signs-yield-signsduties-of-persons-using-highway)
* [47.36.120 - City limit signs.](#4736120---city-limit-signs)
* [47.36.130 - Meddling with signs prohibited.](#4736130---meddling-with-signs-prohibited)
* [47.36.141 - Bus shelters—Advertising.](#4736141---bus-sheltersadvertising)
* [47.36.180 - Forbidden devices—Penalty.](#4736180---forbidden-devicespenalty)
* [47.36.200 - Signs or flaggers at thoroughfare work sites—Penalty.](#4736200---signs-or-flaggers-at-thoroughfare-work-sitespenalty)
* [47.36.250 - Dangerous road conditions requiring special tires, chains, or traction equipment—Signs or devices—Penalty.](#4736250---dangerous-road-conditions-requiring-special-tires-chains-or-traction-equipmentsigns-or-devicespenalty)
* [47.36.260 - Signs indicating proper lane usage.](#4736260---signs-indicating-proper-lane-usage)
* [47.36.270 - Regional shopping center directional signs.](#4736270---regional-shopping-center-directional-signs)
* [47.36.280 - Pavement marking standards.](#4736280---pavement-marking-standards)
* [47.36.290 - State park directional signs.](#4736290---state-park-directional-signs)
* [47.36.300 - Supplemental directional signs—Erection by local governments.](#4736300---supplemental-directional-signserection-by-local-governments)
* [47.36.310 - Motorist information signs—Interstate highways—Contents, placement, fees.](#4736310---motorist-information-signsinterstate-highwayscontents-placement-fees)
* [47.36.320 - Motorist information signs, tourist-oriented directional signs—Primary and scenic roads—Contents, placement, fees.](#4736320---motorist-information-signs-tourist-oriented-directional-signsprimary-and-scenic-roadscontents-placement-fees)
* [47.36.330 - Motorist information signs—Maximum number and distance.](#4736330---motorist-information-signsmaximum-number-and-distance)
* [47.36.340 - Motorist information signs—Lodging.](#4736340---motorist-information-signslodging)
* [47.36.350 - Motorist information signs—Installation time.](#4736350---motorist-information-signsinstallation-time)
* [47.36.360 - Motorist information signs—"RV" logo.](#4736360---motorist-information-signsrv-logo)
* [47.36.400 - Adopt-a-highway signs.](#4736400---adopt-a-highway-signs)
## 47.36.005 - Definitions.
The definitions set forth in this section apply throughout this chapter.

1. "Erect" means to construct, build, raise, assemble, place, affix, attach, create, paint, draw, or in any other way bring into being or establish.

2. "Interstate system" means a state highway that is or becomes part of the national system of interstate and defense highways as described in section 103(d) of Title 23, United States Code.

3. "Maintain" means to allow to exist.

4. "Primary system" means a state highway that is or becomes part of the federal-aid primary system as described in section 103(b) of Title 23, United States Code.

5. "Scenic system" means (a) a state highway within a public park, federal forest area, public beach, public recreation area, or national monument, (b) a state highway or portion of a highway outside the boundaries of an incorporated city or town designated by the legislature as a part of the scenic system, or (c) a state highway or portion of a highway outside the boundaries of an incorporated city or town designated by the legislature as a part of the scenic and recreational highway system except for the sections of highways specifically excluded in RCW 47.42.025.

6. "Motorist information sign panel" means a panel, rectangular in shape, located in the same manner as other official traffic signs readable from the main traveled ways, and consisting of:

    a. The words "GAS," "FOOD," "LODGING," "CAMPING," "RECREATION," or "TOURIST ACTIVITIES" and directional information; and

    b. One or more individual business signs mounted on the panel.

7. "Business sign" means a separately attached sign mounted on the motorist information sign panel or roadside area information panel to show the brand or trademark and name, or both, of the motorist service available on the crossroad at or near the interchange. Nationally, regionally, or locally known commercial symbols or trademarks for service stations, restaurants, and motels shall be used when applicable. The brand or trademark identification symbol used on the business sign shall be reproduced with the colors and general shape consistent with customary use. Messages, trademarks, or brand symbols that interfere with, imitate, or resemble an official warning or regulatory traffic sign, signal, or device are prohibited.

8. "Roadside area information panel or display" means a panel or display located so as not to be readable from the main traveled way, erected in a safety rest area, scenic overlook, or similar roadside area, for providing motorists with information in the specific interest of the traveling public.

9. "Tourist-oriented directional sign" means a sign on a motorist information sign panel on the state highway system to provide directional information to a qualified tourist-oriented business, service, or activity.

10. "Qualified tourist-oriented business" means a lawful cultural, historical, recreational, educational, or entertaining activity or a unique or unusual commercial or nonprofit activity, the major portion of whose income or visitors are derived during its normal business season from motorists not residing in the immediate area of the activity.

11. "Adopt-a-highway sign" means a sign on a state highway right-of-way referring to the departments' adopt-a-highway litter control program.

\[ [1999 c 201 § 1](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/1999-00/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/House/1322.SL.pdf?cite=1999%20c%20201%20§%201); [1991 c 94 § 3](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/1991-92/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/Senate/5720-S.SL.pdf?cite=1991%20c%2094%20§%203); \]

## 47.36.010 - Restoration of United States survey markers.
The department shall fix permanent monuments at the original positions of all United States government monuments at township corners, section corners, quarter section corners, meander corners, and witness markers, as originally established by the United States government survey whenever any such original monuments or markers fall within the right-of-way of any state highway, and aid in the reestablishment of any such corners, monuments, or markers destroyed or obliterated by the construction of any state highway by permitting inspection of the records in the department's office.

\[ [1984 c 7 § 188](http://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1984c7.pdf?cite=1984%20c%207%20§%20188); [1961 c 13 § 47.36.010](http://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1961c13.pdf?cite=1961%20c%2013%20§%2047.36.010); [1937 c 53 § 42](http://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1937c53.pdf?cite=1937%20c%2053%20§%2042); RRS § 6400-42; [1931 c 117 § 1](http://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1931c117.pdf?cite=1931%20c%20117%20§%201); RRS § 6830-1; \]

## 47.36.020 - Traffic control signals.
The secretary of transportation shall adopt specifications for a uniform system of traffic control signals consistent with the provisions of this title for use upon public highways within this state. Such uniform system shall correlate with and so far as possible conform to the system current as approved by the American Association of State Highway Officials and as set out in the manual of uniform traffic control devices for streets and highways.

\[ [1977 ex.s. c 151 § 60](http://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1977ex1c151.pdf?cite=1977%20ex.s.%20c%20151%20§%2060); [1961 c 13 § 47.36.020](http://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1961c13.pdf?cite=1961%20c%2013%20§%2047.36.020); [1937 c 53 § 50](http://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1937c53.pdf?cite=1937%20c%2053%20§%2050); RRS § 6400-50; prior:  1927 c 309 § 6; RRS § 6362-6; \]

## 47.36.022 - Traffic control signals—Duration of yellow change interval.
The duration of a yellow change interval at any traffic control signal must be at least as long as the minimum yellow change interval identified in the manual of uniform traffic control devices for streets and highways as adopted by the department under this chapter.

\[ [2012 c 85 § 2](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/2011-12/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/Senate/5188-S2.SL.pdf?cite=2012%20c%2085%20§%202); \]

## 47.36.025 - Vehicle-activated traffic control signals—Detection of motorcycles and bicycles.
1. For the purposes of this section:

    a. "Arterial" means a public road or highway that is designated or qualifies as a principal or minor arterial under a state or local law, ordinance, regulation, or plan.

    b. "Bicycle" means a human-powered vehicle with metallic wheels at least sixteen inches in diameter or with metallic braking strips and metallic components, not necessarily including the frame or fork, which may be lawfully ridden on a public road or highway.

    c. "Bicycle route" means a route (i) that is designated as a route for bicycle use in a state or local law, ordinance, rule, or plan, or (ii) that provides bicycle access to urban areas that are not reasonably and conveniently accessible through other bicycle routes. The level of existing or projected use by bicyclists is a factor to consider in determining whether a bicycle route provides access that is not reasonably and conveniently available from other bicycle routes. An intersection that provides necessary linkages in a bicycle route or between routes is considered a part of the bicycle route or routes.

    d. "Design complete" means that all major design work for a new vehicle-activated traffic control signal has been completed and that the funding necessary for complete construction of the vehicle-activated traffic control signal has been firmly secured.

    e. "Existing vehicle-activated traffic control signal" means a vehicle-activated traffic control signal that is in use or design complete on or before July 26, 2009.

    f. [Empty]
        i. "Motorcycle" means a motor vehicle designed to travel on not more than three wheels in contact with the ground, on which the driver:

(A) Rides on a seat or saddle and the motor vehicle is designed to be steered with a handle bar; or

(B) Rides on a seat in a partially or completely enclosed seating area that is equipped with safety belts and the motor vehicle is designed to be steered with a steering wheel.

        ii. "Motorcycle" excludes a farm tractor, a power wheelchair, an electric personal assistive mobility device, a motorized foot scooter, an electric-assisted bicycle, and a moped.

    g. "Restricted right turn lane" means a right turn only lane where a right turn is not allowed after stopping but only upon a green signal.

    h. "Routinely and reliably detect motorcycles and bicycles" means that the detection equipment at a vehicle-activated traffic control signal is capable of detecting and will reliably detect a motorcycle or bicycle (i) when the motorcycle or bicycle is present immediately before a stop line or crosswalk in the center of a lane at an intersection or road entrance to such an intersection, or (ii) when the motorcycle or bicycle is present at marked detection areas.

    i. "Vehicle-activated traffic control signal" means a traffic control signal on a public road or highway that detects the presence of a vehicle as a means to change a signal phase.

2. During routine maintenance or monitoring activities, but subject to the availability of funds:

    a. All existing vehicle-activated traffic control signals that do not currently routinely and reliably detect motorcycles and bicycles must be adjusted to do so to the extent that the existing equipment is capable consistent with safe traffic control. Priority must be given to existing vehicle-activated traffic control signals for which complaints relating to motorcycle or bicycle detection have been received and existing vehicle-activated traffic control signals that are otherwise identified as a detection problem for motorcyclists or bicyclists, or both. Jurisdictions operating existing vehicle-activated traffic control signals shall establish and publicize a procedure for filing these complaints in writing or by email, and maintain a record of these complaints and responses; and

    b. Where motorcycle and bicycle detection is limited to certain areas other than immediately before the stop line or crosswalk in the center of a lane at an existing vehicle-activated traffic control signal, those detection areas must be clearly marked on the pavement at left turn lanes, through lanes, and limited right turn lanes. These detection areas must also be marked to allow a bicyclist to leave a bicycle lane to enter a detection area, if necessary, to cross an intersection. Pavement markings must be consistent with the standards described in the state of Washington's "Manual on Uniform Traffic Control Devices for Streets and Highways" obtainable from the department of transportation.

3. [Empty]
    a. If at least a substantial portion of detection equipment at an existing vehicle-activated traffic control signal on an arterial or bicycle route is scheduled to be replaced or upgraded, the replaced or upgraded detection equipment must routinely and reliably detect motorcycles and bicycles. For purposes of this subsection (3)(a), "substantial portion" means that the proposed replacement or upgrade will cost more than twenty percent of the cost of full replacement or upgraded detection equipment that would routinely and reliably detect motorcycles and bicycles.

    b. If at least a substantial portion of detection equipment at an existing vehicle-activated traffic control signal on a public road or highway that is not an arterial or bicycle route is scheduled to be replaced or upgraded, the replaced or upgraded detection equipment must routinely and reliably detect motorcycles and bicycles. For purposes of this subsection (3)(b), "substantial portion" means that the proposed replacement or upgrade will cost more than fifty percent of the cost of full replacement or upgraded detection equipment that would routinely and reliably detect motorcycles and bicycles.

4. All vehicle-activated traffic control signals that are design complete and put in operation after July 26, 2009, must be designed and operated, when in use, to routinely and reliably detect motorcycles and bicycles, including the detection of bicycles in bicycle lanes that cross an intersection.

\[ [2009 c 275 § 10](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/2009-10/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/Senate/5482.SL.pdf?cite=2009%20c%20275%20§%2010); \]

## 47.36.030 - Traffic control devices—Specifications to counties and cities—Signs, banners over highways.
1. The secretary of transportation shall have the power and it shall be its duty to adopt and designate a uniform state standard for the manufacture, display, erection, and location of all signs, signals, signboards, guideposts, and other traffic devices erected or to be erected upon the state highways of the state of Washington for the purpose of furnishing information to persons traveling upon such state highways regarding traffic regulations, directions, distances, points of danger, and conditions requiring caution, and for the purpose of imposing restrictions upon persons operating vehicles thereon. Such signs shall conform as nearly as practicable to the manual of specifications for the manufacture, display, and erection of uniform traffic control devices for streets and highways and all amendments, corrections, and additions thereto.

2. The department of transportation shall prepare plans and specifications of the uniform state standard of traffic devices so adopted and designated, showing the materials, colors, and designs thereof, and shall upon the issuance of any such plans and specifications or revisions thereof and upon request, furnish to the boards of county commissioners and the governing body of any incorporated city or town, a copy thereof. Signs, signals, signboards, guideposts, and other traffic devices erected on county roads shall conform in all respects to the specifications of color, design, and location approved by the secretary. Traffic devices hereafter erected within incorporated cities and towns shall conform to such uniform state standard of traffic devices so far as is practicable. The uniform system must allow local transit authority bus shelters located within the right-of-way of the state highway system to display and maintain commercial advertisements subject to applicable federal regulations, if any.

3. The uniform system adopted by the secretary under this section may allow signs, banners, or decorations over a highway that:

    a. Are in unincorporated areas;

    b. Are at least twenty vertical feet above a highway; and

    c. Do not interfere with or obstruct the view of any traffic control device.

The department shall adopt rules regulating signs, banners, or decorations installed under this subsection (3).

\[ [2005 c 398 § 1](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/2005-06/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/House/1124.SL.pdf?cite=2005%20c%20398%20§%201); [2003 c 198 § 3](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/2003-04/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/House/1463-S.SL.pdf?cite=2003%20c%20198%20§%203); [1977 ex.s. c 151 § 61](http://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1977ex1c151.pdf?cite=1977%20ex.s.%20c%20151%20§%2061); [1961 c 13 § 47.36.030](http://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1961c13.pdf?cite=1961%20c%2013%20§%2047.36.030); 1945 c 178 § 1, part; 1937 c 53 § 48, part; Rem. Supp. 1945 § 6400-48, part; prior: 1931 c 118 § 1, part; RRS § 6308-1, part; 1923 c 102 § 1, part; 1917 c 78 § 1, part; RRS § 6303, part; \]

## 47.36.040 - Furnished by department, paid for by counties and cities.
The department, upon written request, shall cause to be manufactured, painted, and printed, and shall furnish to any county legislative authority or the governing body of any incorporated city or town, directional signboards, guide boards, and posts of the uniform state standard of color, shape, and design for the erection and maintenance thereof by the county legislative authority or the governing body of any incorporated city or town upon the roads and streets within their respective jurisdictions. The directional signboards, guide boards, and posts shall be manufactured and furnished, as aforesaid, pursuant to written request showing the number of signs desired and the directional or guide information to be printed thereon. The department shall fix a charge for each signboard, guide board, and post manufactured and furnished as aforesaid, based upon the ultimate cost of the operations to the department, and the county legislative authority, from the county road fund, and the governing body of any incorporated city or town, from the street fund, shall pay the charges so fixed for all signboards, guide boards, and posts so received from the department.

\[ [1984 c 7 § 189](http://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1984c7.pdf?cite=1984%20c%207%20§%20189); [1961 c 13 § 47.36.040](http://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1961c13.pdf?cite=1961%20c%2013%20§%2047.36.040); 1945 c 178 § 1, part; 1937 c 53 § 48, part; Rem. Supp. 1945 § 6400-48, part; prior: 1931 c 118 § 1, part; RRS § 6308-1, part; 1923 c 102 § 1, part; 1917 c 78 § 1, part; RRS § 6303, part; \]

## 47.36.050 - Duty to erect traffic devices on state highways and railroad crossings.
The department shall erect and maintain upon every state highway in the state of Washington suitable and proper signs, signals, signboards, guideposts, and other traffic devices according to the adopted and designated state standard of design, erection, and location, and in the manner required by law. The department shall erect and maintain upon all state highways appropriate stop signs, warning signs, and school signs. Any person, firm, corporation, or municipal corporation, building, owning, controlling, or operating a railroad that crosses any state highway at grade shall construct, erect, and maintain at or near each point of crossing, or at such point or points as will meet the approval of the department, a sign of the type known as the saw buck crossing sign with the lettering "railroad crossing" inscribed thereon and also a suitable inscription indicating the number of tracks. The sign must be of standard design that will comply with the plans and specifications furnished by the department. Additional safety devices and signs may be installed at any time when required by the utilities and transportation commission as provided by laws regulating railroad-highway grade crossings.

\[ [1984 c 7 § 190](http://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1984c7.pdf?cite=1984%20c%207%20§%20190); [1961 c 13 § 47.36.050](http://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1961c13.pdf?cite=1961%20c%2013%20§%2047.36.050); [1937 c 53 § 49](http://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1937c53.pdf?cite=1937%20c%2053%20§%2049); RRS § 6400-49; prior: 1931 c 118 § 1, part; RRS § 6308-1, part; 1923 c 102 § 1, part; RRS § 6303, part; [1919 c 146 § 1](http://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1919c146.pdf?cite=1919%20c%20146%20§%201); [1917 c 78 § 2](http://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1917c78.pdf?cite=1917%20c%2078%20§%202); RRS § 6304. FORMER PART OF SECTION: 1937 c 53 § 51 now in RCW  47.36.053; \]

## 47.36.053 - General duty to place and maintain traffic devices on state highways and railroad crossings.
The department shall place and maintain such traffic devices conforming to the manual and specifications adopted upon all state highways as it deems necessary to carry out the provisions of this title or to regulate, warn, or guide traffic.

\[ [1984 c 7 § 191](http://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1984c7.pdf?cite=1984%20c%207%20§%20191); [1961 c 13 § 47.36.053](http://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1961c13.pdf?cite=1961%20c%2013%20§%2047.36.053); [1937 c 53 § 51](http://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1937c53.pdf?cite=1937%20c%2053%20§%2051); RRS § 6400-51; \]

## 47.36.060 - Traffic devices on county roads and city streets.
Local authorities in their respective jurisdictions shall place and maintain such traffic devices upon public highways under their jurisdiction as are necessary to carry out the provisions of the law or local traffic ordinances or to regulate, warn, or guide traffic. Cities and towns, which as used in this section mean cities and towns having a population of over fifteen thousand according to the latest federal census, shall adequately equip with traffic devices, streets that are designated as forming a part of the route of a primary or secondary state highway and streets which constitute connecting roads and secondary state highways to such cities and towns. The traffic devices, signs, signals, and markers shall comply with the uniform state standard for the manufacture, display, direction, and location thereof as designated by the department. The design, location, erection, and operation of traffic devices and traffic control signals upon such city or town streets constituting either the route of a primary or secondary state highway to the city or town or connecting streets to the primary or secondary state highways through the city or town shall be under the direction of the department, and if the city or town fails to comply with any such directions, the department shall provide for the design, location, erection, or operation thereof, and any cost incurred therefor shall be charged to and paid from any funds in the motor vehicle fund of the state that have accrued or may accrue to the credit of the city or town, and the state treasurer shall issue warrants therefor upon vouchers submitted and approved by the department.

\[ [1984 c 7 § 192](http://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1984c7.pdf?cite=1984%20c%207%20§%20192); [1961 c 13 § 47.36.060](http://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1961c13.pdf?cite=1961%20c%2013%20§%2047.36.060); [1955 c 179 § 4](http://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1955c179.pdf?cite=1955%20c%20179%20§%204); [1939 c 81 § 1](http://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1939c81.pdf?cite=1939%20c%2081%20§%201); [1937 c 53 § 52](http://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1937c53.pdf?cite=1937%20c%2053%20§%2052); RRS § 6400-52; \]

## 47.36.070 - Failure to erect signs, procedure.
Whenever any person, firm, corporation, municipal corporation, or local authorities responsible for the erection and maintenance, or either, of signs at any railroad crossing or point of danger upon any state highway fails, neglects, or refuses to erect and maintain, or either, the sign or signs as required by law at highway-railroad grade crossings, the utilities and transportation commission shall upon complaint of the department or upon complaint of any party interested, or upon its own motion, enter upon a hearing in the manner provided by law for hearings with respect to railroad-highway grade crossings and make and enforce proper orders for the erection or maintenance of the signs, or both.

\[ [1984 c 7 § 193](http://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1984c7.pdf?cite=1984%20c%207%20§%20193); [1961 c 13 § 47.36.070](http://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1961c13.pdf?cite=1961%20c%2013%20§%2047.36.070); [1937 c 53 § 54](http://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1937c53.pdf?cite=1937%20c%2053%20§%2054); RRS § 6400-54; \]

## 47.36.080 - Signs at railroad crossings.
Wherever it is considered necessary or convenient the department may erect approach and warning signs upon the approach of any state highway to a highway-railroad grade crossing situated at a sufficient distance therefrom to make the warning effective. The department may further provide such additional or other highway-railroad grade crossing markings as may be considered to serve the interests of highway safety.

\[ [1984 c 7 § 194](http://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1984c7.pdf?cite=1984%20c%207%20§%20194); [1961 c 13 § 47.36.080](http://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1961c13.pdf?cite=1961%20c%2013%20§%2047.36.080); [1937 c 53 § 57](http://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1937c53.pdf?cite=1937%20c%2053%20§%2057); RRS § 6400-57; \]

## 47.36.090 - Cooperation with United States on road markers.
Standard federal road markers shall be placed on state highways in the manner requested by the department of transportation of the United States. The department of transportation of the state of Washington is authorized and empowered to cooperate with the several states and with the federal government in promoting, formulating, and adopting a standard and uniform system of numbering or designating state highways of an interstate character and in promoting, formulating, and adopting uniform and standard specifications for the manufacture, display, erection, and location of road markers and signs, for the information, direction, and control of persons traveling upon public highways.

\[ [1984 c 7 § 195](http://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1984c7.pdf?cite=1984%20c%207%20§%20195); [1961 c 13 § 47.36.090](http://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1961c13.pdf?cite=1961%20c%2013%20§%2047.36.090); [1937 c 53 § 55](http://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1937c53.pdf?cite=1937%20c%2053%20§%2055); RRS § 6400-55; prior:  1925 c 24 § 1; RRS § 6303-1; \]

## 47.36.095 - Highway designation system—Signs.
The department is hereby authorized to establish a continuing system for the designating of state highways and branches or portions thereof, heretofore established by the legislature of the state of Washington, to give designations to such state highways and branches, or portions thereof, in accord with that system, and to install signs in accord therewith on such state highways and branches, or portions thereof. The system may be changed from time to time and shall be extended to new state highways and branches, or portions thereof, as they are hereafter established by the legislature.

\[ [1984 c 7 § 196](http://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1984c7.pdf?cite=1984%20c%207%20§%20196); [1967 ex.s. c 145 § 43](http://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1967ex1c145.pdf?cite=1967%20ex.s.%20c%20145%20§%2043); [1963 c 24 § 1](http://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1963c24.pdf?cite=1963%20c%2024%20§%201); \]

## 47.36.097 - Highway designation system—Filing.
Designations or redesignations assigned under the system by the department pursuant to RCW 47.36.095 as each is made, shall be filed with the secretary of state and with the auditor of each county. Thereafter such highways shall be so designated for all purposes.

\[ [1984 c 7 § 197](http://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1984c7.pdf?cite=1984%20c%207%20§%20197); [1967 ex.s. c 145 § 46](http://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1967ex1c145.pdf?cite=1967%20ex.s.%20c%20145%20§%2046); \]

## 47.36.100 - Directional, caution, and stop signs.
Directional signs showing distance and direction to points of importance may be placed at all crossings and intersections of primary and secondary state highways. The department may place such directional signs as it deems necessary upon any city streets designated by it as forming a part of the route of any primary or secondary state highway through any incorporated city or town. Caution and warning signs or signals shall be placed wherever practicable on all primary and secondary state highways in a manner provided by law. Stop signs shall be placed, erected, and maintained by the department as follows: Upon all county roads at the point of intersection with any arterial primary or secondary state highway; upon all primary and secondary state highways at the point of intersection with any county road that has been designated by the department as an arterial having preference over the traffic on the state highway; and upon at least one state highway at the intersection of two state highways.

\[ [1984 c 7 § 198](http://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1984c7.pdf?cite=1984%20c%207%20§%20198); [1967 ex.s. c 145 § 38](http://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1967ex1c145.pdf?cite=1967%20ex.s.%20c%20145%20§%2038); [1961 c 13 § 47.36.100](http://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1961c13.pdf?cite=1961%20c%2013%20§%2047.36.100); [1947 c 206 § 1](http://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1947c206.pdf?cite=1947%20c%20206%20§%201); [1937 c 53 § 56](http://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1937c53.pdf?cite=1937%20c%2053%20§%2056); Rem. Supp. 1947 § 6400-56; \]

## 47.36.110 - Stop signs, "Yield" signs—Duties of persons using highway.
In order to provide safety at intersections on the state highway system, the department may require persons traveling upon any portion of such highway to stop before entering the intersection, except as provided in RCW 46.61.190. For this purpose there may be erected a standard stop sign as prescribed in the state department of transportation's "Manual on Uniform Traffic Control Devices for Streets and Highways." All persons traveling upon the highway shall come to a complete stop at such a sign, except as provided in RCW 46.61.190, and the appearance of any sign so located is sufficient warning to a person that he or she is required to stop. A person stopping at such a sign shall proceed through that portion of the highway in a careful manner and at a reasonable rate of speed not to exceed twenty miles per hour. It is unlawful to fail to comply with the directions of any such stop sign, except as provided in RCW 46.61.190. When the findings of a traffic engineering study show that the condition of an intersection is such that vehicles may safely enter the major artery without stopping, the department or local authorities in their respective jurisdictions shall install and maintain a "Yield" sign.

\[ [2020 c 66 § 5](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/2019-20/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/Senate/6208-S.SL.pdf?cite=2020%20c%2066%20§%205); [2010 c 8 § 10013](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/2009-10/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/Senate/6239-S.SL.pdf?cite=2010%20c%208%20§%2010013); [1984 c 7 § 199](http://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1984c7.pdf?cite=1984%20c%207%20§%20199); [1963 ex.s. c 3 § 49](http://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1963ex1c3.pdf?cite=1963%20ex.s.%20c%203%20§%2049); [1961 c 13 § 47.36.110](http://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1961c13.pdf?cite=1961%20c%2013%20§%2047.36.110); [1955 c 146 § 6](http://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1955c146.pdf?cite=1955%20c%20146%20§%206); [1937 c 53 § 59](http://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1937c53.pdf?cite=1937%20c%2053%20§%2059); RRS § 6400-59; \]

## 47.36.120 - City limit signs.
The department shall erect wherever it deems necessary upon state highways at or near their point of entrance into cities and towns, signs of the standard design designating the city or town limits of the cities or towns.

\[ [1984 c 7 § 200](http://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1984c7.pdf?cite=1984%20c%207%20§%20200); [1961 c 13 § 47.36.120](http://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1961c13.pdf?cite=1961%20c%2013%20§%2047.36.120); [1937 c 53 § 58](http://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1937c53.pdf?cite=1937%20c%2053%20§%2058); RRS § 6400-58; \]

## 47.36.130 - Meddling with signs prohibited.
No person shall without lawful authority attempt to or in fact alter, deface, injure, knock down, or remove any official traffic control signal, traffic device or railroad sign or signal, or any inscription, shield, or insignia thereon, or any other part thereof.

\[ [1961 c 13 § 47.36.130](http://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1961c13.pdf?cite=1961%20c%2013%20§%2047.36.130); [1937 c 53 § 53](http://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1937c53.pdf?cite=1937%20c%2053%20§%2053); RRS § 6400-53; \]

## 47.36.141 - Bus shelters—Advertising.
1. Local transit authority bus shelters within the right-of-way of the state highway system may display and maintain commercial advertisements subject to applicable federal regulations, if any. Pursuant to RCW 47.12.120, the department may lease state right-of-way air space to local transit authorities for this purpose, unless there are significant safety concerns regarding the placement of certain advertisements.

2. Advertisements posted on a local transit authority's bus shelter may not exceed twenty-four square feet on each side of the panel. Panels may not be placed on the roof of the shelter or on the forward side of the shelter facing oncoming traffic.

\[ [2003 c 198 § 1](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/2003-04/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/House/1463-S.SL.pdf?cite=2003%20c%20198%20§%201); \]

## 47.36.180 - Forbidden devices—Penalty.
1. It is unlawful to erect or maintain at or near a city street, county road, or state highway any structure, sign, or device:

    a. Visible from a city street, county road, or state highway and simulating any directional, warning, or danger sign or light likely to be mistaken for such a sign or bearing any such words as "danger," "stop," "slow," "turn," or similar words, figures, or directions likely to be construed as giving warning to traffic;

    b. Visible from a city street, county road, or state highway and displaying any red, green, blue, or yellow light or intermittent or blinking light or rotating light identical or similar in size, shape, and color to that used on any emergency vehicle or road equipment or any light otherwise likely to be mistaken for a warning, danger, directional, or traffic control signal or sign;

    c. Visible from a city street, county road, or state highway and displaying any lights tending to blind persons operating vehicles upon the highway, city street, or county road, or any glaring light, or any light likely to be mistaken for a vehicle upon the highway or otherwise to be so mistaken as to constitute a danger; or

    d. Visible from a city street, county road, or state highway and flooding or intending to flood or directed across the roadway of the highway with a directed beam or diffused light, whether or not the flood light is shielded against directing its flood beam toward approaching traffic on the highway, city street, or county road.

2. Any structure or device erected or maintained contrary to the provisions of this section is a public nuisance, and the department, the chief of the Washington state patrol, the county sheriff, or the chief of police of any city or town shall notify the owner thereof that it constitutes a public nuisance and must be removed, and if the owner fails to do so, the department, the chief of the Washington state patrol, the county sheriff, or the chief of police of any city or town may abate the nuisance.

3. If the owner fails to remove any structure or device within fifteen days after being notified to remove the structure or device as provided in this section, he or she is guilty of a misdemeanor.

\[ [2003 c 53 § 257](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/2003-04/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/Senate/5758.SL.pdf?cite=2003%20c%2053%20§%20257); [1984 c 7 § 201](http://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1984c7.pdf?cite=1984%20c%207%20§%20201); [1961 c 13 § 47.36.180](http://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1961c13.pdf?cite=1961%20c%2013%20§%2047.36.180); [1957 c 204 § 1](http://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1957c204.pdf?cite=1957%20c%20204%20§%201); [1937 c 53 § 62](http://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1937c53.pdf?cite=1937%20c%2053%20§%2062); RRS § 6400-62; \]

## 47.36.200 - Signs or flaggers at thoroughfare work sites—Penalty.
1. When construction, repair, or maintenance work is conducted on or adjacent to a public highway, county road, street, bridge, or other thoroughfare commonly traveled and when the work interferes with the normal and established mode of travel on the highway, county road, street, bridge, or thoroughfare, the location shall be properly posted by prominently displayed signs or flaggers or both. Signs used for posting in such an area shall be consistent with the provisions found in the state of Washington "Manual on Uniform Traffic Control Devices for Streets and Highways" obtainable from the department of transportation.

2. If the construction, repair, or maintenance work includes or uses grooved pavement, abrupt lane edges, steel plates, or gravel or earth surfaces, the construction, repair, or maintenance zone must be posted with signs stating the condition, as required by current law, and in addition, must warn motorcyclists of the potential hazard only if the hazard or condition exists on a paved public highway, county road, street, bridge, or other thoroughfare commonly traveled. For the purposes of this subsection, the department shall adopt by rule a uniform sign or signs for this purpose, including at least the following language, "MOTORCYCLES USE EXTREME CAUTION."

3. Any contractor, firm, corporation, political subdivision, or other agency performing such work shall comply with this section.

4. Each driver of a motor vehicle used in connection with such construction, repair, or maintenance work shall obey traffic signs posted for, and flaggers stationed at such location in the same manner and under the same restrictions as is required for the driver of any other vehicle.

5. A violation of or a failure to comply with this section is a misdemeanor. Each day upon which there is a violation, or there is a failure to comply, constitutes a separate violation.

\[ [2010 c 8 § 10014](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/2009-10/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/Senate/6239-S.SL.pdf?cite=2010%20c%208%20§%2010014); [2006 c 331 § 1](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/2005-06/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/Senate/6762.SL.pdf?cite=2006%20c%20331%20§%201); [2003 c 355 § 1](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/2003-04/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/Senate/5457-S.SL.pdf?cite=2003%20c%20355%20§%201); [2003 c 53 § 258](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/2003-04/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/Senate/5758.SL.pdf?cite=2003%20c%2053%20§%20258); [1984 c 7 § 202](http://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1984c7.pdf?cite=1984%20c%207%20§%20202); [1961 c 13 § 47.36.200](http://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1961c13.pdf?cite=1961%20c%2013%20§%2047.36.200); prior:  1957 c 95 § 1; \]

## 47.36.250 - Dangerous road conditions requiring special tires, chains, or traction equipment—Signs or devices—Penalty.
1. If the department or its delegate determines at any time for any part of the public highway system that the unsafe conditions of the roadway require particular tires, tire chains, or traction equipment in addition to or beyond the ordinary pneumatic rubber tires, the department may establish the following recommendations or requirements with respect to the use of such equipment for all persons using such public highway:

    a. Traction advisory - oversize vehicles prohibited.

    b. Traction advisory - oversize vehicles prohibited. Vehicles over 10,000 GVW - chains required.

    c. Traction advisory - oversize vehicles prohibited. All vehicles - chains required, except all wheel drive.

2. Any equipment that may be required by this section shall be approved by the state patrol as authorized under RCW 46.37.420.

3. The department shall place and maintain signs and other traffic control devices on the public highways that indicate the tire, tire chain, or traction equipment recommendation or requirement determined under this section. Such signs or traffic control devices shall in no event prohibit the use of studded tires from November 1st to April 1st, but when the department determines that chains are required and that no other traction equipment will suffice, the requirement is applicable to all types of tires including studded tires. The Washington state patrol or the department may specify different recommendations or requirements for four wheel drive vehicles in gear.

4. Failure to obey a requirement indicated under this section is a traffic infraction under chapter 46.63 RCW subject to a penalty of five hundred dollars including all statutory assessments.

\[ [2003 c 356 § 1](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/2003-04/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/Senate/5284.SL.pdf?cite=2003%20c%20356%20§%201); [2003 c 53 § 259](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/2003-04/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/Senate/5758.SL.pdf?cite=2003%20c%2053%20§%20259); [1987 c 330 § 747](http://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1987c330.pdf?cite=1987%20c%20330%20§%20747); [1984 c 7 § 203](http://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1984c7.pdf?cite=1984%20c%207%20§%20203); [1975 1st ex.s. c 255 § 1](http://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1975ex1c255.pdf?cite=1975%201st%20ex.s.%20c%20255%20§%201); [1969 ex.s. c 7 § 2](http://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1969ex1c7.pdf?cite=1969%20ex.s.%20c%207%20§%202); \]

## 47.36.260 - Signs indicating proper lane usage.
The department shall erect signs on multilane highways indicating proper lane usage.

\[ [1986 c 93 § 6](http://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1986c93.pdf?cite=1986%20c%2093%20§%206); \]

## 47.36.270 - Regional shopping center directional signs.
Regional shopping center directional signs shall be erected and maintained on state highway right-of-way if they meet each of the following criteria:

1. There shall be at least five hundred thousand square feet of retail floor space available for lease at the regional shopping center;

2. The regional shopping center shall contain at least three major department stores that are owned by a national or regional retail chain organization;

3. The shopping center shall be located within one mile of the roadway;

4. The center shall generate at least nine thousand daily one-way vehicle trips to the center;

5. There is sufficient space available for installation of the directional sign as specified in the Manual On Uniform Traffic Control Devices;

6. Supplemental follow-through directional signing is required at key decision points to direct motorists to the shopping center if it is not clearly visible from the point of exit from the main traveled way.

The department shall collect from the regional shopping center a reasonable fee based upon the cost of erection and maintenance of the directional sign.

\[ [1987 c 469 § 1](http://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1987c469.pdf?cite=1987%20c%20469%20§%201); \]

## 47.36.280 - Pavement marking standards.
The department of transportation shall, by January 1, 1992, adopt minimum pavement marking standards for the area designating the limits of the vehicle driving lane along the right edge for arterials that do not have curbs or sidewalks and are inside urbanized areas. In preparing the standards, the department of transportation shall take into consideration all types of pavement markings, including flat, raised, and recessed markings, and their effect on pedestrians, bicycle, and motor vehicle safety.

The standards shall provide that a jurisdiction shall conform to these requirements, at such time thereafter that it undertakes to (1) renew or install permanent markings on the existing or new roadway, and (2) remove existing nonconforming raised pavement markers at the time the jurisdiction prepares to resurface the roadway, or earlier, at its option. These standards shall be in effect, as provided in this section, unless the legislative authority of the local governmental body finds that special circumstances exist affecting vehicle and pedestrian safety that warrant a variance to the standard.

For the purposes of this section, "urbanized area" means an area designated as such by the United States bureau of census and having a population of more than fifty thousand. Other jurisdictions that install pavement marking material on the right edge of the roadway shall do so in a manner not in conflict with the minimum state standard.

\[ [1991 c 214 § 4](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/1991-92/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/House/1081-S.SL.pdf?cite=1991%20c%20214%20§%204); \]

## 47.36.290 - State park directional signs.
Directional signs for state parks within fifteen miles of an interstate highway shall be erected and maintained on the interstate highway by the department despite the existence of additional directional signs on primary or scenic system highways in closer proximity to such state parks.

\[ [1985 c 376 § 7](http://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1985c376.pdf?cite=1985%20c%20376%20§%207); \]

## 47.36.300 - Supplemental directional signs—Erection by local governments.
1. The legislative authority of any county, city, or town may erect, or permit the erection of, supplemental directional signs directing motorists to motorist service businesses qualified for motorist information sign panels pursuant to RCW 47.36.310 or 47.36.320 in any location on, or adjacent to, the right-of-way of any roads or streets within their jurisdiction.

2. Appropriate fees may be charged to cover the cost of issuing permits, installation, or maintenance of such signs.

3. Supplemental signs and their locations shall comply with all applicable provisions of this chapter, the Manual on Uniform Traffic Control Devices, and such rules as may be adopted by the department.

\[ [1999 c 201 § 2](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/1999-00/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/House/1322.SL.pdf?cite=1999%20c%20201%20§%202); [1986 c 114 § 3](http://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1986c114.pdf?cite=1986%20c%20114%20§%203); \]

## 47.36.310 - Motorist information signs—Interstate highways—Contents, placement, fees.
The department is authorized to erect and maintain motorist information sign panels within the right-of-way of the interstate highway system to give the traveling public specific information as to gas, food, lodging, camping, or tourist-oriented business available on a crossroad at or near an interchange. Motorist information sign panels shall include the words "GAS," "FOOD," "LODGING," "CAMPING," or "TOURIST ACTIVITIES" and the letters "RV" next to a gas, food, lodging, camping, or tourist activity sign if the business or destination accommodates recreational vehicles, and directional information. Directional information may contain one or more individual business signs maintained on the panel. The "RV" logo for businesses or destinations that accommodate recreational vehicles shall be placed in the lower right corner of the gas, food, lodging, camping, or tourist activity sign and shall be in the form of a small yellow circle with the letters "RV" in black. In managing the number of individual business signs to be displayed, the department must ensure the use of available space on a panel is maximized. Motorist information sign panels are authorized within the corporate limits of cities and towns and areas zoned for commercial or industrial uses at locations where there is adequate distance between interchanges to ensure compliance with the Manual on Uniform Traffic Control Devices. The erection and maintenance of motorist information sign panels shall also conform to the Manual on Uniform Traffic Control Devices and rules adopted by the state department of transportation. A motorist service or tourist-oriented business located within one mile of an interstate highway shall not be permitted to display its name, brand, or trademark on a motorist information sign panel unless its owner has first entered into an agreement with the department limiting the height of its on-premise [on-premises] signs at the site of its service installation to not more than fifteen feet higher than the roof of its main building measured to the bottom of the on-premise [on-premises] sign. The restriction for on-premise [on-premises] signs does not apply if the sign is not visible from the highway. The department may, on a case-by-case basis, waive the height restriction when an on-premise [on-premises] sign is visible from the rural interstate system. The department shall charge sufficient fees for the display of individual business signs to recover the costs of their installation and maintenance, and shall charge sufficient fees to recover costs for the erection and maintenance of the motorist information sign panels.

\[ [2005 c 407 § 1](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/2005-06/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/House/1798-S.SL.pdf?cite=2005%20c%20407%20§%201); [1999 c 201 § 3](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/1999-00/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/House/1322.SL.pdf?cite=1999%20c%20201%20§%203); [1987 c 469 § 3](http://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1987c469.pdf?cite=1987%20c%20469%20§%203); [1986 c 114 § 1](http://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1986c114.pdf?cite=1986%20c%20114%20§%201); [1985 c 142 § 1](http://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1985c142.pdf?cite=1985%20c%20142%20§%201); [1984 c 7 § 223](http://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1984c7.pdf?cite=1984%20c%207%20§%20223); [1974 ex.s. c 80 § 2](http://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1974ex1c80.pdf?cite=1974%20ex.s.%20c%2080%20§%202); \]

## 47.36.320 - Motorist information signs, tourist-oriented directional signs—Primary and scenic roads—Contents, placement, fees.
The department is authorized to erect and maintain motorist information sign panels within the right-of-way of noninterstate highways to give the traveling public specific information as to gas, food, lodging, recreation, or tourist-oriented businesses accessible by way of highways intersecting the noninterstate highway. The motorist information sign panels are permitted only at locations within the corporate limits of cities and towns and areas zoned for commercial or industrial uses where there is adequate distance between interchanges to ensure compliance with the Manual on Uniform Traffic Control Devices. Motorist information sign panels shall include the words "GAS," "FOOD," "LODGING," "RECREATION," or "TOURIST ACTIVITIES" and the letters "RV" next to a gas, food, lodging, camping, or tourist activity sign if the business or destination accommodates recreational vehicles, and directional information. Directional information may contain one or more individual business signs maintained on the panel. The "RV" logo for businesses or destinations that accommodate recreational vehicles shall be placed in the lower right corner of the gas, food, lodging, camping, or tourist activity sign and shall be in the form of a small yellow circle with the letters "RV" in black. In managing the number of individual business signs to be displayed, the department must ensure the use of available space on a panel is maximized. The erection and maintenance of motorist information sign panels along noninterstate highways shall also conform to the Manual on Uniform Traffic Control Devices and rules adopted by the state department of transportation. A motorist service or tourist-oriented business located within one mile of a noninterstate highway shall not be permitted to display its name, brand, or trademark on a motorist information sign panel unless its owner has first entered into an agreement with the department limiting the height of its on-premise [on-premises] signs at the site of its service installation to not more than fifteen feet higher than the roof of its main building measured to the bottom of the on-premise [on-premises] sign.

The department shall adopt rules for the erection and maintenance of tourist-oriented directional signs with the following restrictions:

1. Where installed, they shall be placed in advance of the "GAS," "FOOD," "LODGING," "RECREATION," or "RV" motorist information sign panels previously described in this section;

2. Signs shall not be placed to direct a motorist to an activity visible from the main traveled roadway;

3. Premises on which the qualified tourist-oriented business is located must be within fifteen miles of the state highway except as provided in RCW 47.36.330(3) (b) and (c), and necessary supplemental signing on local roads must be provided before the installation of the signs on the state highway.

The department shall charge sufficient fees for the display of individual business signs to recover the costs of their installation and maintenance, and shall charge sufficient fees to recover the costs for the erection and maintenance of the motorist information sign panels.

\[ [2005 c 407 § 2](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/2005-06/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/House/1798-S.SL.pdf?cite=2005%20c%20407%20§%202); [1999 c 213 § 1](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/1999-00/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/Senate/5005.SL.pdf?cite=1999%20c%20213%20§%201); [1999 c 201 § 4](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/1999-00/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/House/1322.SL.pdf?cite=1999%20c%20201%20§%204); [1986 c 114 § 2](http://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1986c114.pdf?cite=1986%20c%20114%20§%202); [1985 c 376 § 4](http://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1985c376.pdf?cite=1985%20c%20376%20§%204); [1985 c 142 § 2](http://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1985c142.pdf?cite=1985%20c%20142%20§%202); [1984 c 7 § 224](http://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1984c7.pdf?cite=1984%20c%207%20§%20224); [1974 ex.s. c 80 § 4](http://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1974ex1c80.pdf?cite=1974%20ex.s.%20c%2080%20§%204); \]

## 47.36.330 - Motorist information signs—Maximum number and distance.
1. Not more than six business signs may be permitted on motorist information sign panels authorized by RCW 47.36.310 and 47.36.320.

2. The maximum distance that eligible service facilities may be located on either side of an interchange or intersection to qualify for a business sign are as follows:

    a. On interstate highways, gas, food, or lodging activities shall be located within three miles. Camping or tourist-oriented activities shall be within five miles.

    b. On noninterstate highways, gas, food, lodging, recreation, or tourist-oriented activities shall be located within five miles.

3. [Empty]
    a. If no eligible services are located within the distance limits prescribed in subsection (2) of this section, the distance limits shall be increased until an eligible service of a type being considered is reached, up to a maximum of fifteen miles.

    b. The department may erect and maintain signs on an alternate route that is longer than fifteen miles if it is safer and still provides reasonable and convenient travel to an eligible service.

    c. The department may erect and maintain signs on a route up to a maximum of twenty miles if it qualifies as an eligible service and is within a distressed area as defined in RCW 43.168.020.

\[ [2005 c 136 § 16](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/2005-06/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/Senate/5176-S.SL.pdf?cite=2005%20c%20136%20§%2016); [1999 c 213 § 2](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/1999-00/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/Senate/5005.SL.pdf?cite=1999%20c%20213%20§%202); [1999 c 201 § 5](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/1999-00/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/House/1322.SL.pdf?cite=1999%20c%20201%20§%205); [1985 c 142 § 3](http://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1985c142.pdf?cite=1985%20c%20142%20§%203); \]

## 47.36.340 - Motorist information signs—Lodging.
To be eligible for placement of a business sign on a motorist information sign panel a lodging activity shall:

1. Be licensed or approved by the department of social and health services or county health authority;

2. Provide adequate sleeping and bathroom accommodations available for rental on a daily basis; and

3. Provide public telephone facilities.

\[ [1999 c 201 § 6](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/1999-00/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/House/1322.SL.pdf?cite=1999%20c%20201%20§%206); [1985 c 376 § 8](http://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1985c376.pdf?cite=1985%20c%20376%20§%208); \]

## 47.36.350 - Motorist information signs—Installation time.
The department shall ensure that motorist information sign panels are installed within nine months of receiving the request for installation.

\[ [1999 c 201 § 7](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/1999-00/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/House/1322.SL.pdf?cite=1999%20c%20201%20§%207); [1991 c 94 § 5](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/1991-92/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/Senate/5720-S.SL.pdf?cite=1991%20c%2094%20§%205); \]

## 47.36.360 - Motorist information signs—"RV" logo.
1. The department of transportation shall not include the logo "RV" under RCW 47.36.310 and 47.36.320 unless a business or destination requests an "RV" logo and the department determines that the gas, food, or lodging business or the camping or tourist activity destination provides parking spaces, overhang clearances, and entrances and exits designed to accommodate recreational or other large vehicles.

2. The department may charge a reasonable fee in accordance with RCW 47.36.310 or 47.36.320 to defray the costs associated with the installation and maintenance of signs with "RV" logos.

3. The department may adopt rules necessary to administer this section.

\[ [2005 c 407 § 3](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/2005-06/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/House/1798-S.SL.pdf?cite=2005%20c%20407%20§%203); \]

## 47.36.400 - Adopt-a-highway signs.
The department may install adopt-a-highway signs, with the following restrictions:

1. Signs shall be designed by the department and may only include the words "adopt-a-highway litter control facility" or "adopt-a-highway litter control next XX miles" and the name of the litter control area sponsor. The sponsor's name shall not be displayed more predominantly than the remainder of the sign message. Trademarks or business logos may be displayed;

2. Signs may be placed along interstate, primary, and scenic system highways;

3. Signs may be erected at other state-owned transportation facilities in accordance with RCW 47.40.100(1);

4. For each litter control area designated by the department, one sign may be placed visible to traffic approaching from each direction;

5. Signs shall be located so as not to detract from official traffic control signs installed pursuant to the manual on uniform traffic control devices adopted by the department;

6. Signs shall be located so as not to restrict sight distance on approaches to intersections or interchanges;

7. The department may charge reasonable fees to defray the cost of manufacture, installation, and maintenance of adopt-a-highway signs.

\[ [1998 c 180 § 1](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/1997-98/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/House/3057-S.SL.pdf?cite=1998%20c%20180%20§%201); [1991 c 94 § 4](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/1991-92/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/Senate/5720-S.SL.pdf?cite=1991%20c%2094%20§%204); \]


## **47.36.XXX - TBD**
**
1. [Empty]

    a. The department may erect and maintain auto mall directional signs on any state highway right-of-way if the following criteria are met:

        i. There must be at least two or more commercial uses engaged in the sale and service of new vehicles, and the following activities may also be included at the auto mall: (A) Quick service lube and oil centers; (B) financing of motor vehicles; (C) parts sales; (D) motor vehicle insurance; (E) motor vehicle repair and detailing; (F) motor vehicle registration and title services; or (G) fleet sales;

        ii. The auto mall must incorporate at least twenty acres in aggregate;

        iii. The auto mall must be located within one and one-half miles of the state highway;

        iv. Sufficient space must be available for installation of the directional signs as specified in the "Manual on Uniform Traffic Control Devices."

    b. The department may also erect and maintain supplemental follow-through directional signs to be installed at key decision points to direct motorists to the auto mall if it is not clearly visible from the point of exit from the state highway.

2. The department shall collect from the vehicle dealers that comprise the auto mall a reasonable fee based upon the cost of erection and maintenance of the directional signs.

3. For the purposes of this section, "auto mall" includes any auto park, auto complex, auto row, and auto center.


[ 2021 c XXX § 1; ]**

## **47.36.XXX - TBD**
**
1. [Empty]

    a. The department may erect and maintain auto mall directional signs on any state highway right-of-way if the following criteria are met:

        i. There must be at least two or more commercial uses engaged in the sale and service of new vehicles, and the following activities may also be included at the auto mall: (A) Quick service lube and oil centers; (B) financing of motor vehicles; (C) parts sales; (D) motor vehicle insurance; (E) motor vehicle repair and detailing; (F) motor vehicle registration and title services; or (G) fleet sales;

        ii. The auto mall must incorporate at least twenty acres in aggregate;

        iii. The auto mall must be located within one and one-half miles of the state highway;

        iv. Sufficient space must be available for installation of the directional signs as specified in the "Manual on Uniform Traffic Control Devices."

    b. The department may also erect and maintain supplemental follow-through directional signs to be installed at key decision points to direct motorists to the auto mall if it is not clearly visible from the point of exit from the state highway.

2. The department shall collect from the vehicle dealers that comprise the auto mall a reasonable fee based upon the cost of erection and maintenance of the directional signs.

3. For the purposes of this section, "auto mall" includes any auto park, auto complex, auto row, and auto center.


[ 2021 c XXX § 1; ]**

## **47.36.XXX - TBD**
**
1. [Empty]

    a. The department may erect and maintain auto mall directional signs on any state highway right-of-way if the following criteria are met:

        i. There must be at least two or more commercial uses engaged in the sale and service of new vehicles, and the following activities may also be included at the auto mall: (A) Quick service lube and oil centers; (B) financing of motor vehicles; (C) parts sales; (D) motor vehicle insurance; (E) motor vehicle repair and detailing; (F) motor vehicle registration and title services; or (G) fleet sales;

        ii. The auto mall must incorporate at least twenty acres in aggregate;

        iii. The auto mall must be located within one and one-half miles of the state highway;

        iv. Sufficient space must be available for installation of the directional signs as specified in the "Manual on Uniform Traffic Control Devices."

    b. The department may also erect and maintain supplemental follow-through directional signs to be installed at key decision points to direct motorists to the auto mall if it is not clearly visible from the point of exit from the state highway.

2. The department shall collect from the vehicle dealers that comprise the auto mall a reasonable fee based upon the cost of erection and maintenance of the directional signs.

3. For the purposes of this section, "auto mall" includes any auto park, auto complex, auto row, and auto center.


[ 2021 c XXX § 1; ]**

## **47.36.XXX - TBD**
**
1. [Empty]

    a. The department may erect and maintain auto mall directional signs on any state highway right-of-way if the following criteria are met:

        i. There must be at least two or more commercial uses engaged in the sale and service of new vehicles, and the following activities may also be included at the auto mall: (A) Quick service lube and oil centers; (B) financing of motor vehicles; (C) parts sales; (D) motor vehicle insurance; (E) motor vehicle repair and detailing; (F) motor vehicle registration and title services; or (G) fleet sales;

        ii. The auto mall must incorporate at least twenty acres in aggregate;

        iii. The auto mall must be located within one and one-half miles of the state highway;

        iv. Sufficient space must be available for installation of the directional signs as specified in the "Manual on Uniform Traffic Control Devices."

    b. The department may also erect and maintain supplemental follow-through directional signs to be installed at key decision points to direct motorists to the auto mall if it is not clearly visible from the point of exit from the state highway.

2. The department shall collect from the vehicle dealers that comprise the auto mall a reasonable fee based upon the cost of erection and maintenance of the directional signs.

3. For the purposes of this section, "auto mall" includes any auto park, auto complex, auto row, and auto center.


[ 2021 c XXX § 1; ]**

## **47.36.XXX - TBD**
**
1. [Empty]

    a. The department may erect and maintain auto mall directional signs on any state highway right-of-way if the following criteria are met:

        i. There must be at least two or more commercial uses engaged in the sale and service of new vehicles, and the following activities may also be included at the auto mall: (A) Quick service lube and oil centers; (B) financing of motor vehicles; (C) parts sales; (D) motor vehicle insurance; (E) motor vehicle repair and detailing; (F) motor vehicle registration and title services; or (G) fleet sales;

        ii. The auto mall must incorporate at least twenty acres in aggregate;

        iii. The auto mall must be located within one and one-half miles of the state highway;

        iv. Sufficient space must be available for installation of the directional signs as specified in the "Manual on Uniform Traffic Control Devices."

    b. The department may also erect and maintain supplemental follow-through directional signs to be installed at key decision points to direct motorists to the auto mall if it is not clearly visible from the point of exit from the state highway.

2. The department shall collect from the vehicle dealers that comprise the auto mall a reasonable fee based upon the cost of erection and maintenance of the directional signs.

3. For the purposes of this section, "auto mall" includes any auto park, auto complex, auto row, and auto center.


[ 2021 c XXX § 1; ]**

## **47.36.XXX - TBD**
**
1. [Empty]

    a. The department may erect and maintain auto mall directional signs on any state highway right-of-way if the following criteria are met:

        i. There must be at least two or more commercial uses engaged in the sale and service of new vehicles, and the following activities may also be included at the auto mall: (A) Quick service lube and oil centers; (B) financing of motor vehicles; (C) parts sales; (D) motor vehicle insurance; (E) motor vehicle repair and detailing; (F) motor vehicle registration and title services; or (G) fleet sales;

        ii. The auto mall must incorporate at least twenty acres in aggregate;

        iii. The auto mall must be located within one and one-half miles of the state highway;

        iv. Sufficient space must be available for installation of the directional signs as specified in the "Manual on Uniform Traffic Control Devices."

    b. The department may also erect and maintain supplemental follow-through directional signs to be installed at key decision points to direct motorists to the auto mall if it is not clearly visible from the point of exit from the state highway.

2. The department shall collect from the vehicle dealers that comprise the auto mall a reasonable fee based upon the cost of erection and maintenance of the directional signs.

3. For the purposes of this section, "auto mall" includes any auto park, auto complex, auto row, and auto center.


[ 2021 c XXX § 1; ]**

## **47.36.XXX - TBD**
**
1. [Empty]

    a. The department may erect and maintain auto mall directional signs on any state highway right-of-way if the following criteria are met:

        i. There must be at least two or more commercial uses engaged in the sale and service of new vehicles, and the following activities may also be included at the auto mall: (A) Quick service lube and oil centers; (B) financing of motor vehicles; (C) parts sales; (D) motor vehicle insurance; (E) motor vehicle repair and detailing; (F) motor vehicle registration and title services; or (G) fleet sales;

        ii. The auto mall must incorporate at least twenty acres in aggregate;

        iii. The auto mall must be located within one and one-half miles of the state highway;

        iv. Sufficient space must be available for installation of the directional signs as specified in the "Manual on Uniform Traffic Control Devices."

    b. The department may also erect and maintain supplemental follow-through directional signs to be installed at key decision points to direct motorists to the auto mall if it is not clearly visible from the point of exit from the state highway.

2. The department shall collect from the vehicle dealers that comprise the auto mall a reasonable fee based upon the cost of erection and maintenance of the directional signs.

3. For the purposes of this section, "auto mall" includes any auto park, auto complex, auto row, and auto center.


[ 2021 c XXX § 1; ]**

## **47.36.XXX - TBD**
**
1. [Empty]

    a. The department may erect and maintain auto mall directional signs on any state highway right-of-way if the following criteria are met:

        i. There must be at least two or more commercial uses engaged in the sale and service of new vehicles, and the following activities may also be included at the auto mall: (A) Quick service lube and oil centers; (B) financing of motor vehicles; (C) parts sales; (D) motor vehicle insurance; (E) motor vehicle repair and detailing; (F) motor vehicle registration and title services; or (G) fleet sales;

        ii. The auto mall must incorporate at least twenty acres in aggregate;

        iii. The auto mall must be located within one and one-half miles of the state highway;

        iv. Sufficient space must be available for installation of the directional signs as specified in the "Manual on Uniform Traffic Control Devices."

    b. The department may also erect and maintain supplemental follow-through directional signs to be installed at key decision points to direct motorists to the auto mall if it is not clearly visible from the point of exit from the state highway.

2. The department shall collect from the vehicle dealers that comprise the auto mall a reasonable fee based upon the cost of erection and maintenance of the directional signs.

3. For the purposes of this section, "auto mall" includes any auto park, auto complex, auto row, and auto center.


[ 2021 c XXX § 1; ]**

## **47.36.XXX - TBD**
**
1. [Empty]

    a. The department may erect and maintain auto mall directional signs on any state highway right-of-way if the following criteria are met:

        i. There must be at least two or more commercial uses engaged in the sale and service of new vehicles, and the following activities may also be included at the auto mall: (A) Quick service lube and oil centers; (B) financing of motor vehicles; (C) parts sales; (D) motor vehicle insurance; (E) motor vehicle repair and detailing; (F) motor vehicle registration and title services; or (G) fleet sales;

        ii. The auto mall must incorporate at least twenty acres in aggregate;

        iii. The auto mall must be located within one and one-half miles of the state highway;

        iv. Sufficient space must be available for installation of the directional signs as specified in the "Manual on Uniform Traffic Control Devices."

    b. The department may also erect and maintain supplemental follow-through directional signs to be installed at key decision points to direct motorists to the auto mall if it is not clearly visible from the point of exit from the state highway.

2. The department shall collect from the vehicle dealers that comprise the auto mall a reasonable fee based upon the cost of erection and maintenance of the directional signs.

3. For the purposes of this section, "auto mall" includes any auto park, auto complex, auto row, and auto center.


[ 2021 c XXX § 1; ]**
