# 70.395 - Private detention facilities.
* [70.395.010 - Findings—Intent.](#70395010---findingsintent)
* [70.395.020 - Definitions.](#70395020---definitions)
* [70.395.030 - Prohibition on private incarceration.](#70395030---prohibition-on-private-incarceration)
* [70.395.900 - Construction—2021 c 30.](#70395900---construction2021-c-30)
* [70.395.901 - Effective date—2021 c 30.](#70395901---effective-date2021-c-30)
## 70.395.020 - Definitions.
The definitions in this section apply throughout this chapter unless the context clearly requires otherwise.

1. "Detention facility" means any facility in which persons are incarcerated or otherwise involuntarily confined for purposes including prior to trial or sentencing, fulfilling the terms of a sentence imposed by a court, or for other judicial or administrative processes or proceedings.

2. "Private detention facility" means a detention facility that is operated by a private, nongovernmental for-profit entity and operating pursuant to a contract or agreement with a federal, state, or local governmental entity.

\[ [2021 c 30 § 2](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/2021-22/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/House/1090.SL.pdf?cite=2021%20c%2030%20§%202); \]

## 70.395.030 - Prohibition on private incarceration.
1. Except as provided in subsections (2) and (3) of this section, no person, business, or state or local governmental entity shall operate a private detention facility within the state or utilize a contract with a private detention facility within the state. No state or local governmental entity shall utilize a contract with a private detention facility outside of Washington state, except as provided in RCW 72.68.010(2).

2. A private detention facility that is operating pursuant to a valid contract with a governmental entity that was in effect prior to January 1, 2021, may remain in operation for the duration of that contract, not to include any extensions or modifications made to, or authorized by, that contract.

3. In accordance with the legislative findings in RCW 70.395.010, this section does not apply if the involuntary confinement is at:

    a.  A facility providing rehabilitative, counseling, treatment, mental health, educational, or medical services to juveniles who are subject to Title 13 RCW, or similarly applicable federal law;

    b.  A facility providing evaluation and treatment or forensic services to a person who has been civilly detained or is subject to an order of commitment by a court pursuant to chapter 10.77, 71.05, 71.09, or 71.34 RCW, or similarly applicable federal law;

    c.  A facility used for the quarantine or isolation of persons for public health reasons pursuant to RCW 43.20.050, or similarly applicable federal law;

    d.  A facility used for work release under chapter 72.65 RCW, or similarly applicable federal law;

    e.  A facility used for extraordinary medical placement;

    f.  A facility used for residential substance use disorder treatment;

    g.  A facility used to house persons pursuant to 18 U.S.C. Sec. 4013; or

    h.  A facility owned and operated by federally recognized tribes and contracting with a government.

\[ [2021 c 30 § 3](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/2021-22/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/House/1090.SL.pdf?cite=2021%20c%2030%20§%203); \]

## 70.395.900 - Construction—2021 c 30.
Chapter 30, Laws of 2021 shall be construed liberally for the accomplishment of the purposes thereof.

\[ [2021 c 30 § 4](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/2021-22/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/House/1090.SL.pdf?cite=2021%20c%2030%20§%204); \]

## 70.395.901 - Effective date—2021 c 30.
This act is necessary for the immediate preservation of the public peace, health, or safety, or support of the state government and its existing public institutions, and takes effect immediately [April 14, 2021].

\[ [2021 c 30 § 5](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/2021-22/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/House/1090.SL.pdf?cite=2021%20c%2030%20§%205); \]

