# 72.70 - Western interstate corrections compact.
* [72.70.010 - Compact enacted—Provisions.](#7270010---compact-enactedprovisions)
* [72.70.020 - Secretary authorized to receive or transfer inmates pursuant to contract.](#7270020---secretary-authorized-to-receive-or-transfer-inmates-pursuant-to-contract)
* [72.70.030 - Responsibilities of courts, departments, agencies and officers.](#7270030---responsibilities-of-courts-departments-agencies-and-officers)
* [72.70.040 - Hearings.](#7270040---hearings)
* [72.70.050 - Secretary may enter into contracts.](#7270050---secretary-may-enter-into-contracts)
* [72.70.060 - Secretary may provide clothing, etc., to inmate released in another state.](#7270060---secretary-may-provide-clothing-etc-to-inmate-released-in-another-state)
* [72.70.900 - Severability—Liberal construction—1959 c 287.](#7270900---severabilityliberal-construction1959-c-287)
## 72.70.010 - Compact enacted—Provisions.
The Western Interstate Corrections Compact as contained herein is hereby enacted into law and entered into on behalf of this state with any and all other states legally joining therein in a form substantially as follows:

WESTERN INTERSTATE CORRECTIONS

COMPACT

ARTICLE I—Purpose and Policy

The party states, desiring by common action to improve their institutional facilities and provide programs of sufficiently high quality for the confinement, treatment and rehabilitation of various types of offenders, declare that it is the policy of each of the party states to provide such facilities and programs on a basis of cooperation with one another, thereby serving the best interests of such offenders and of society. The purpose of this compact is to provide for the development and execution of such programs of cooperation for the confinement, treatment and rehabilitation of offenders.

ARTICLE II—Definitions

As used in this compact, unless the context clearly requires otherwise:

    a.  "State" means a state of the United States, or, subject to the limitation contained in Article VII, Guam.

    b.  "Sending state" means a state party to this compact in which conviction was had.

    c.  "Receiving state" means a state party to this compact to which an inmate is sent for confinement other than a state in which conviction was had.

    d.  "Inmate" means a male or female offender who is under sentence to or confined in a prison or other correctional institution.

    e.  "Institution" means any prison, reformatory or other correctional facility except facilities for persons suffering from mental illness or persons with disabilities in which inmates may lawfully be confined.

ARTICLE III—Contracts

    a.  Each party state may make one or more contracts with any one or more of the other party states for the confinement of inmates on behalf of a sending state in institutions situated within receiving states. Any such contract shall provide for:

1. Its duration.

2. Payments to be made to the receiving state by the sending state for inmate maintenance, extraordinary medical and dental expenses, and any participation in or receipt by inmates of rehabilitative or correctional services, facilities, programs or treatment not reasonably included as part of normal maintenance.

3. Participation in programs of inmate employment, if any; the disposition or crediting of any payments received by inmates on account thereof; and the crediting of proceeds from or disposal of any products resulting therefrom.

4. Delivery and retaking of inmates.

5. Such other matters as may be necessary and appropriate to fix the obligations, responsibilities and rights of the sending and receiving states.

    b.  Prior to the construction or completion of construction of any institution or addition thereto by a party state, any other party state or states may contract therewith for the enlargement of the planned capacity of the institution or addition thereto, or for the inclusion therein of particular equipment or structures, and for the reservation of a specific percentum of the capacity of the institution to be kept available for use by inmates of the sending state or states so contracting. Any sending state so contracting may, to the extent that moneys are legally available therefor, pay to the receiving state, a reasonable sum as consideration for such enlargement of capacity, or provision of equipment or structures, and reservation of capacity. Such payment may be in a lump sum or in installments as provided in the contract.

    c.  The terms and provisions of this compact shall be a part of any contract entered into by the authority of or pursuant thereto, and nothing in any such contract shall be inconsistent therewith.

ARTICLE IV—Procedures and Rights

    a.  Whenever the duly constituted judicial or administrative authorities in a state party to this compact, and which has entered into a contract pursuant to Article III, shall decide that confinement in, or transfer of an inmate to, an institution within the territory of another party state is necessary in order to provide adequate quarters and care or desirable in order to provide an appropriate program of rehabilitation or treatment, said officials may direct that the confinement be within an institution within the territory of said other party state, the receiving state to act in that regard solely as agent for the sending state.

    b.  The appropriate officials of any state party to this compact shall have access, at all reasonable times, to any institution in which it has a contractual right to confine inmates for the purpose of inspecting the facilities thereof and visiting such of its inmates as may be confined in the institution.

    c.  Inmates confined in an institution pursuant to the terms of this compact shall at all times be subject to the jurisdiction of the sending state and may at any time be removed therefrom for transfer to a prison or other institution within the sending state, for transfer to another institution in which the sending state may have a contractual or other right to confine inmates, for release on probation or parole, for discharge, or for any other purpose permitted by the laws of the sending state; provided that the sending state shall continue to be obligated to such payments as may be required pursuant to the terms of any contract entered into under the terms of Article III.

    d.  Each receiving state shall provide regular reports to each sending state on the inmates of that sending state in institutions pursuant to this compact including a conduct record of each inmate and certify said record to the official designated by the sending state, in order that each inmate may have the benefit of his or her record in determining and altering the disposition of said inmate in accordance with the law which may obtain in the sending state and in order that the same may be a source of information for the sending state.

    e.  All inmates who may be confined in an institution pursuant to the provisions of this compact shall be treated in a reasonable and humane manner and shall be cared for and treated equally with such similar inmates of the receiving state as may be confined in the same institution. The fact of confinement in a receiving state shall not deprive any inmate so confined of any legal rights which said inmate would have had if confined in an appropriate institution of the sending state.

    f.  Any hearing or hearings to which an inmate confined pursuant to this compact may be entitled by the laws of the sending state may be had before the appropriate authorities of the sending state, or of the receiving state if authorized by the sending state. The receiving state shall provide adequate facilities for such hearings as may be conducted by the appropriate officials of a sending state. In the event such hearing or hearings are had before officials of the receiving state, the governing law shall be that of the sending state and a record of the hearing or hearings as prescribed by the sending state shall be made. Said record together with any recommendations of the hearing officials shall be transmitted forthwith to the official or officials before whom the hearing would have been had if it had taken place in the sending state. In any and all proceedings had pursuant to the provisions of this subdivision, the officials of the receiving state shall act solely as agents of the sending state and no final determination shall be made in any matter except by the appropriate officials of the sending state. Costs of records made pursuant to this subdivision shall be borne by the sending state.

    g.  Any inmate confined pursuant to this compact shall be released within the territory of the sending state unless the inmate, and the sending and receiving states, shall agree upon release in some other place. The sending state shall bear the cost of such return to its territory.

    h.  Any inmate confined pursuant to the terms of this compact shall have any and all rights to participate in and derive any benefits or incur or be relieved of any obligations or have such obligations modified or his status changed on account of any action or proceeding in which he could have participated if confined in any appropriate institution of the sending state located within such state.

    i.  The parent, guardian, trustee, or other person or persons entitled under the laws of the sending state to act for, advise, or otherwise function with respect to any inmate shall not be deprived of or restricted in his exercise of any power in respect of any inmate confined pursuant to the terms of this compact.

ARTICLE V—Acts Not Reviewable In Receiving

State; Extradition

    a.  Any decision of the sending state in respect of any matter over which it retains jurisdiction pursuant to this compact shall be conclusive upon and not reviewable within the receiving state, but if at the time the sending state seeks to remove an inmate from an institution in the receiving state there is pending against the inmate within such state any criminal charge or if the inmate is suspected of having committed within such state a criminal offense, the inmate shall not be returned without the consent of the receiving state until discharged from prosecution or other form of proceeding, imprisonment or detention for such offense. The duly accredited officers of the sending state shall be permitted to transport inmates pursuant to this compact through any and all states party to this compact without interference.

    b.  An inmate who escapes from an institution in which he is confined pursuant to this compact shall be deemed a fugitive from the sending state and from the state in which the institution is situated. In the case of an escape to a jurisdiction other than the sending or receiving state, the responsibility for institution of extradition proceedings shall be that of the sending state, but nothing contained herein shall be construed to prevent or affect the activities of officers and agencies of any jurisdiction directed toward the apprehension and return of an escapee.

ARTICLE VI—Federal Aid

Any state party to this compact may accept federal aid for use in connection with an institution or program, the use of which is or may be affected by this compact or any contract pursuant thereto and any inmate in a receiving state pursuant to this compact may participate in any such federally aided program or activity for which the sending and receiving states have made contractual provision; provided that if such program or activity is not part of the customary correctional regimen the express consent of the appropriate official of the sending state shall be required therefor.

ARTICLE VII—Entry Into Force

This compact shall enter into force and become effective and binding upon the states so acting when it has been enacted into law by any two contiguous states from among the states of Alaska, Arizona, California, Colorado, Hawaii, Idaho, Montana, Nebraska, Nevada, New Mexico, Oregon, Utah, Washington and Wyoming. For the purposes of this article, Alaska and Hawaii shall be deemed contiguous to each other; to any and all of the states of California, Oregon and Washington; and to Guam. Thereafter, this compact shall enter into force and become effective and binding as to any other of said states, or any other state contiguous to at least one party state upon similar action by such state. Guam may become party to this compact by taking action similar to that provided for joinder by any other eligible party state and upon the consent of Congress to such joinder. For the purposes of this article, Guam shall be deemed contiguous to Alaska, Hawaii, California, Oregon and Washington.

ARTICLE VIII—Withdrawal and Termination

This compact shall continue in force and remain binding upon a party state until it shall have enacted a statute repealing the same and providing for the sending of formal written notice of withdrawal from the compact to the appropriate officials of all other party states. An actual withdrawal shall not take effect until two years after the notices provided in said statute have been sent. Such withdrawal shall not relieve the withdrawing state from its obligations assumed hereunder prior to the effective date of withdrawal. Before the effective date of withdrawal, a withdrawing state shall remove to its territory, at its own expense, such inmates as it may have confined pursuant to the provisions of this compact.

ARTICLE IX—Other Arrangements Unaffected

Nothing contained in this compact shall be construed to abrogate or impair any agreement or other arrangement which a party state may have with a non-party state for the confinement, rehabilitation or treatment of inmates nor to repeal any other laws of a party state authorizing the making of cooperative institutional arrangements.

ARTICLE X—Construction and Severability

The provisions of this compact shall be liberally construed and shall be severable. If any phrase, clause, sentence or provision of this compact is declared to be contrary to the constitution of any participating state or of the United States or the applicability thereof to any government, agency, person or circumstance is held invalid, the validity of the remainder of this compact and the applicability thereof to any government, agency, person or circumstance shall not be affected thereby. If this compact shall be held contrary to the constitution of any state participating therein, the compact shall remain in full force and effect as to the remaining states and in full force and effect as to the state affected as to all severable matters.

\[ [2020 c 274 § 58](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/2019-20/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/House/2390.SL.pdf?cite=2020%20c%20274%20§%2058); [1977 ex.s. c 80 § 69](http://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1977ex1c80.pdf?cite=1977%20ex.s.%20c%2080%20§%2069); [1959 c 287 § 1](http://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1959c287.pdf?cite=1959%20c%20287%20§%201); \]

## 72.70.020 - Secretary authorized to receive or transfer inmates pursuant to contract.
The secretary of corrections is authorized to receive or transfer an inmate as defined in Article II(d) of the Western Interstate Corrections Compact to any institution as defined in Article II(e) of the Western Interstate Corrections Compact within this state or without this state, if this state has entered into a contract or contracts for the confinement of inmates in such institutions pursuant to Article III of the Western Interstate Corrections Compact.

\[ [1981 c 136 § 118](http://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1981c136.pdf?cite=1981%20c%20136%20§%20118); [1979 c 141 § 290](http://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1979c141.pdf?cite=1979%20c%20141%20§%20290); [1959 c 287 § 2](http://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1959c287.pdf?cite=1959%20c%20287%20§%202); \]

## 72.70.030 - Responsibilities of courts, departments, agencies and officers.
The courts, departments, agencies and officers of this state and its subdivisions shall enforce this compact and shall do all things appropriate to the effectuation of its purposes and intent which may be within their respective jurisdictions including but not limited to the making and submission of such reports as are required by the compact.

\[ [1959 c 287 § 3](http://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1959c287.pdf?cite=1959%20c%20287%20§%203); \]

## 72.70.040 - Hearings.
The secretary and members of the *board of prison terms and paroles are hereby authorized and directed to hold such hearings as may be requested by any other party state pursuant to Article IV(f) of the Western Interstate Corrections Compact. Additionally, the secretary and members of the *board of prison terms and paroles may hold out-of-state hearings in connection with the case of any inmate of this state confined in an institution of another state party to the Western Interstate Corrections Compact.

\[ [1979 c 141 § 291](http://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1979c141.pdf?cite=1979%20c%20141%20§%20291); [1959 c 287 § 4](http://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1959c287.pdf?cite=1959%20c%20287%20§%204); \]

## 72.70.050 - Secretary may enter into contracts.
The secretary of corrections is hereby empowered to enter into such contracts on behalf of this state as may be appropriate to implement the participation of this state in the Western Interstate Corrections Compact pursuant to Article III thereof. No such contract shall be of any force or effect until approved by the attorney general.

\[ [1981 c 136 § 119](http://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1981c136.pdf?cite=1981%20c%20136%20§%20119); [1979 c 141 § 292](http://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1979c141.pdf?cite=1979%20c%20141%20§%20292); [1959 c 287 § 5](http://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1959c287.pdf?cite=1959%20c%20287%20§%205); \]

## 72.70.060 - Secretary may provide clothing, etc., to inmate released in another state.
If any agreement between this state and any other state party to the Western Interstate Corrections Compact enables the release of an inmate of this state confined in an institution of another state to be released in such other state in accordance with Article IV(g) of this compact, then the secretary is authorized to provide clothing, transportation and funds to such inmate in accordance with the provisions of chapter 72.02 RCW.

\[ [1983 c 3 § 186](http://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1983c3.pdf?cite=1983%20c%203%20§%20186); [1979 c 141 § 293](http://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1979c141.pdf?cite=1979%20c%20141%20§%20293); [1959 c 287 § 6](http://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1959c287.pdf?cite=1959%20c%20287%20§%206); \]

## 72.70.900 - Severability—Liberal construction—1959 c 287.
The provisions of this act shall be severable and if any phrase, clause, sentence, or provision of this act is declared to be unconstitutional or the applicability thereof to any state, agency, person or circumstance is held invalid, the constitutionality of this act and the applicability thereof to any other state, agency, person or circumstance shall, with respect to all severable matters, not be affected thereby. It is the legislative intent that the provisions of this act be reasonably and liberally construed.

\[ [1959 c 287 § 7](http://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1959c287.pdf?cite=1959%20c%20287%20§%207); \]

