# 15.64 - Farm marketing.
* [15.64.010 - Director's duties and powers.](#1564010---directors-duties-and-powers)
* [15.64.030 - Studies of farm marketing problems—Rules.](#1564030---studies-of-farm-marketing-problemsrules)
* [15.64.040 - Use of funds for studies—Joint studies with other agencies.](#1564040---use-of-funds-for-studiesjoint-studies-with-other-agencies)
* [15.64.050 - Small farm direct marketing assistance program—Created—Duties.](#1564050---small-farm-direct-marketing-assistance-programcreatedduties)
* [15.64.060 - Farm-to-school program.](#1564060---farm-to-school-program)
## 15.64.010 - Director's duties and powers.
The director shall investigate and promote the economical and efficient distribution of farm products, and in so doing may cooperate with federal agencies and agencies of this and other states engaged in similar activities. For such purposes he or she may:

1. Maintain a market news service by bulletins and through newspapers, giving information as to prices, available supplies of different farm products, demand in local and foreign markets, freight rates, and any other data of interest to producers and consumers;

2. Aid producers and consumers in establishing economical and efficient methods of distribution, promoting more direct business relations by organizing cooperative societies of buyers and sellers and by other means reducing the cost and waste in the distribution of farm products;

3. Investigate the methods of intermediaries handling farm products, and in so doing, he or she may hear complaints and suggestions and may visit places of business of all such intermediaries and may examine under oath, the officers and employees thereof;

4. If he or she finds further legislation on this subject advisable, he or she shall make recommendations thereon to the governor not later than the fifteenth of November of each even-numbered year;

5. Investigate the possibilities of direct dealing between the producer and consumer by parcel post and other mail order methods;

6. Assist in the obtaining and employment of farm labor, and to that end cooperate with federal, state, and municipal agencies engaged in similar work;

7. Investigate the methods, charges, and delays of transportation of farm products and assist producers in relation thereto.

\[ [2010 c 8 § 6068](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/2009-10/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/Senate/6239-S.SL.pdf?cite=2010%20c%208%20§%206068); [1961 c 11 § 15.64.010](http://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1961c11.pdf?cite=1961%20c%2011%20§%2015.64.010); [1917 c 119 § 3](http://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1917c119.pdf?cite=1917%20c%20119%20§%203); RRS § 2876; \]

## 15.64.030 - Studies of farm marketing problems—Rules.
The director shall enact rules and regulations governing the pursuit of technical studies of farm marketing problems. Said studies shall be under the supervision of the director of the experimental station of Washington State University. The extension service of Washington State University shall provide for dissemination to the public of knowledge gained by such studies.

\[ [1961 c 11 § 15.64.030](http://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1961c11.pdf?cite=1961%20c%2011%20§%2015.64.030); [1947 c 280 § 2](http://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1947c280.pdf?cite=1947%20c%20280%20§%202); Rem. Supp. 1947 § 2909-2; \]

## 15.64.040 - Use of funds for studies—Joint studies with other agencies.
Moneys appropriated to the department for agricultural marketing research shall be expended by the department to further studies by the department, the experiment station of Washington State University and the extension service of Washington State University. The studies shall be made jointly or in conjunction with those made by the United States Department of Agriculture as provided for in the Flannigan-Hope Act, Title II "The Agricultural Marketing Act of 1946" Public Law 733. All funds appropriated shall be expended jointly and as matching funds with any federal funds made available for such purposes.

\[ [1961 c 11 § 15.64.040](http://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1961c11.pdf?cite=1961%20c%2011%20§%2015.64.040); [1947 c 280 § 1](http://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1947c280.pdf?cite=1947%20c%20280%20§%201); Rem. Supp. 1947 § 2909-1; \]

## 15.64.050 - Small farm direct marketing assistance program—Created—Duties.
1. The small farm direct marketing assistance program is created.

2. The director shall employ a small farm direct marketing assistant.

3. The small farm direct marketing assistance program shall assist small farms in their direct marketing efforts. In carrying out this duty the program shall:

    a. Assist small farms in complying with federal, state, and local rules and regulations as they apply to direct marketing of agricultural products;

    b. Assist in developing infrastructure to increase direct marketing opportunities for small farms;

    c. Provide information on direct marketing opportunities for small farms;

    d. Promote localized food production systems;

    e. Increase access to information for farmers wishing to sell farm products directly to consumers;

    f. Identify and help reduce market barriers facing small farms in direct marketing;

    g. Assist in developing and submitting proposals to grant programs to assist small farm direct marketing efforts; and

    h. Perform other functions that will assist small farms in directly marketing their products.

\[ [2007 c 522 § 947](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/2007-08/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/House/1128-S.SL.pdf?cite=2007%20c%20522%20§%20947); [2007 c 122 § 1](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/2007-08/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/House/1311.SL.pdf?cite=2007%20c%20122%20§%201); [2001 2nd sp.s. c 3 § 2](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/2001-02/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/House/1984.SL.pdf?cite=2001%202nd%20sp.s.%20c%203%20§%202); \]

## 15.64.060 - Farm-to-school program.
1. A farm-to-school program is created within the department to facilitate increased procurement of Washington grown food by schools.

2. The department, in consultation with the department of health, the office of the superintendent of public instruction, the department of enterprise services, and Washington State University, shall, in order of priority:

    a. Identify and develop policies and procedures to implement and evaluate the farm-to-school program, including coordinating with school procurement officials, buying cooperatives, and other appropriate organizations to develop uniform procurement procedures and materials, and practical recommendations to facilitate the purchase of Washington grown food by the common schools. These policies, procedures, and recommendations shall be made available to school districts to adopt at their discretion;

    b. Assist food producers, distributors, and food brokers to market Washington grown food to schools by informing them of food procurement opportunities, bid procedures, school purchasing criteria, and other requirements;

    c. Assist schools in connecting with local producers by informing them of the sources and availability of Washington grown food as well as the nutritional, environmental, and economic benefits of purchasing Washington grown food;

    d. Identify and recommend mechanisms that will increase the predictability of sales for producers and the adequacy of supply for purchasers;

    e. Identify and make available existing curricula, programs and publications that educate students on the nutritional, environmental, and economic benefits of preparing and consuming locally grown food;

    f. Support efforts to advance other farm-to-school connections such as school gardens or farms and farm visits; and

    g. As resources allow, seek additional funds to leverage state expenditures.

3. The department in cooperation with the office of the superintendent of public instruction shall collect data on the activities conducted pursuant to chapter 215, Laws of 2008 and communicate such data biennially to the appropriate committees of the legislature beginning November 15, 2009. Data collected may include the numbers of schools and farms participating and any increases in the procurement of Washington grown food by the common schools.

4. As used in this section, RCW 28A.335.190, and 28A.235.170, "Washington grown" means grown and packed or processed in Washington.

\[ [2015 c 225 § 9](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/2015-16/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/Senate/5024.SL.pdf?cite=2015%20c%20225%20§%209); [2008 c 215 § 2](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/2007-08/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/Senate/6483-S2.SL.pdf?cite=2008%20c%20215%20§%202); \]


## **15.64.XXX - TBD**
**
1. The meat and poultry processing and marketing assistance program is created.

2. The meat and poultry processing and marketing assistance program must assist small and midsize farms and small and midsize processors in exploring options to expand capacity for processing meat or meat and poultry for sale and direct marketing efforts. In carrying out this duty, the meat and poultry processing and marketing assistance program must:

    a. Assist farms in complying with federal, state, and local rules and regulations as they apply to direct marketing of meat and poultry products;

    b. Assist in developing infrastructure including, but not limited to, custom meat facilities, slaughter facilities inspected by the United States department of agriculture, and slaughter facilities inspected by the department under a cooperative agreement with the United States department of agriculture as appropriate to increase direct marketing opportunities for farms;

    c. Assist processors in complying with federal, state, and local rules and regulations as they apply to processing meat and poultry and the marketing of meat and poultry;

    d. Assist in developing, in consultation with Washington State University extension, training opportunities or apprenticeship opportunities for slaughterers or inspectors;

    e. Provide information on direct marketing opportunities for farms;

    f. Identify and help reduce market barriers facing farms in direct marketing;

    g. Identify and help reduce barriers facing processors in operating slaughter facilities;

    h. Assist in developing and submitting proposals to grant programs to assist farm direct marketing efforts; and

    i. Perform other functions that will assist farms in directly marketing their meat and poultry products.

3. The department must work with the United States department of agriculture to negotiate a cooperative agreement with the United States department of agriculture in order to operate a state inspection program.

4. The department must collect data on the activities conducted under this section and report to the legislature by December 31, 2021, pursuant to RCW 43.01.036. The report must include information related to meat and poultry processing facility needs and information related to the negotiations to enter into a cooperative agreement with the United States department of agriculture to conduct state inspections of meat and poultry facilities.


[ 2021 c XXX § 2; ]**

## **15.64.XXX - TBD**
**
1. The meat and poultry processing and marketing assistance program is created.

2. The meat and poultry processing and marketing assistance program must assist small and midsize farms and small and midsize processors in exploring options to expand capacity for processing meat or meat and poultry for sale and direct marketing efforts. In carrying out this duty, the meat and poultry processing and marketing assistance program must:

    a. Assist farms in complying with federal, state, and local rules and regulations as they apply to direct marketing of meat and poultry products;

    b. Assist in developing infrastructure including, but not limited to, custom meat facilities, slaughter facilities inspected by the United States department of agriculture, and slaughter facilities inspected by the department under a cooperative agreement with the United States department of agriculture as appropriate to increase direct marketing opportunities for farms;

    c. Assist processors in complying with federal, state, and local rules and regulations as they apply to processing meat and poultry and the marketing of meat and poultry;

    d. Assist in developing, in consultation with Washington State University extension, training opportunities or apprenticeship opportunities for slaughterers or inspectors;

    e. Provide information on direct marketing opportunities for farms;

    f. Identify and help reduce market barriers facing farms in direct marketing;

    g. Identify and help reduce barriers facing processors in operating slaughter facilities;

    h. Assist in developing and submitting proposals to grant programs to assist farm direct marketing efforts; and

    i. Perform other functions that will assist farms in directly marketing their meat and poultry products.

3. The department must work with the United States department of agriculture to negotiate a cooperative agreement with the United States department of agriculture in order to operate a state inspection program.

4. The department must collect data on the activities conducted under this section and report to the legislature by December 31, 2021, pursuant to RCW 43.01.036. The report must include information related to meat and poultry processing facility needs and information related to the negotiations to enter into a cooperative agreement with the United States department of agriculture to conduct state inspections of meat and poultry facilities.


[ 2021 c XXX § 2; ]**
