# 23B.17 - Miscellaneous provisions.
* [23B.17.010 - Application to existing corporations.](#23b17010---application-to-existing-corporations)
* [23B.17.015 - Alternative quorum and voting requirements.](#23b17015---alternative-quorum-and-voting-requirements)
* [23B.17.030 - Limitation on liability of directors—Indemnification.](#23b17030---limitation-on-liability-of-directorsindemnification)
## 23B.17.010 - Application to existing corporations.
1. Unless otherwise provided, this title applies to all domestic corporations in existence on July 1, 1990, that were incorporated under any general statute of this state providing for incorporation of corporations for profit.

2. Unless otherwise provided, a foreign corporation authorized to transact business in this state on July 1, 1990, is subject to this title but is not required to obtain a new certificate of authority to transact business under this title.

\[ [1989 c 165 § 188](https://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1989c165.pdf?cite=1989%20c%20165%20§%20188); \]

## 23B.17.015 - Alternative quorum and voting requirements.
1. A corporation that meets the following requirements is subject to the alternative quorum and voting requirements set forth in subsection (2) of this section:

   a. As of the record date of the annual or special meeting of shareholders:

      i. The corporation is a public company;

      ii. Shares of its common stock are admitted to trading on a regulated market listed on the list of the regulated markets notified to the European commission by the member states under Article 16 of the investment services directive (93/22/EEC), as such list is amended from time to time; and

      iii. At least twenty percent of the shares of the corporation's common stock are held of record by the depository trust company and are deposited securities, as defined in the rules, bylaws, and organization certificate of the depository trust company, credited to the account or accounts of one or more stock depositories located in a member state of the European Union;

   b. At the time that such shares were initially listed on the regulated market, shares of the corporation's common stock were listed on the New York stock exchange or the nasdaq stock market;

   c. At the time that such shares were initially listed on the regulated market, such listing was a condition to the acquisition of one hundred percent of the equity interests of a foreign corporation or similar entity where:

      i. The securities of the foreign corporation or similar entity were admitted to trading on the regulated market immediately prior to the acquisition;

      ii. The consideration for the acquisition was newly issued shares of common stock of the corporation; and

      iii. The shares issued in connection with the acquisition equaled before the issuance more than forty percent of the outstanding common stock of the corporation; and

   d. At the corporation's most recent annual or special meeting of shareholders less than sixty-five percent of the shares within the voting group comprising all the votes entitled to be cast were present in person or by proxy.

2. At any annual or special meeting actually held, other than by written consent under RCW 23B.07.040, by a corporation meeting the requirements of subsection (1) of this section:

   a. The required quorum of the voting group consisting of all votes entitled to be cast, and of each other voting group that includes common shares of the corporation which is entitled to vote separately with respect to a proposed corporate action, shall be the lesser of:

      i. A majority of the shares of such voting group other than shares credited to the account of stock depositories located in a member state of the European Union as described in subsection (1)(a)(iii) of this section, provided the number of votes comprising such majority equals or exceeds one-sixth of the total votes entitled to be cast by the voting group; or

      ii. One-third of the total votes entitled to be cast by the voting group.

   b. The vote required for approval by any voting group entitled to vote with respect to any amendment of the corporation's articles of incorporation or bylaws, or any plan of merger or share exchange to which the corporation is a party, or any sale, lease, exchange, or other disposition of all or substantially all of the corporation's property otherwise than in the usual and regular course of business, or dissolution, shall be a majority of the votes actually cast by such voting group with respect to the proposed corporate action, provided that the votes approving the proposed corporate action equal or exceed fifteen percent of the votes within the voting group.

3. The alternative quorum and voting requirements specified in subsection (2) of this section shall, with respect to any corporation meeting the requirements of subsection (1) of this section, control over and supersede any greater quorum or voting requirements that may be specified in the corporation's articles of incorporation or bylaws or in RCW 23B.02.020, 23B.07.250, 23B.07.270, 23B.10.030, 23B.11.030, 23B.12.020, or 23B.14.020.

\[ [2011 c 42 § 1](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/2011-12/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/Senate/5495-S.SL.pdf?cite=2011%20c%2042%20§%201); \]

## 23B.17.030 - Limitation on liability of directors—Indemnification.
The provisions of RCW 23B.08.320 and 23B.08.500 through 23B.08.600 shall apply to any corporation, other than a municipal corporation, incorporated under the laws of the state of Washington.

\[ [1989 c 165 § 190](https://leg.wa.gov/CodeReviser/documents/sessionlaw/1989c165.pdf?cite=1989%20c%20165%20§%20190); \]

