# 7.94 - Extreme risk protection order act.
* [7.94.010 - Purpose—Intent. (Effective until July 1, 2022.)](#794010---purposeintent-effective-until-july-1-2022)
* [7.94.020 - Definitions. (Effective until July 1, 2022.)](#794020---definitions-effective-until-july-1-2022)
* [7.94.030 - Petition for order. (Effective until July 1, 2022.)](#794030---petition-for-order-effective-until-july-1-2022)
* [7.94.040 - Hearings on petition—Grounds for order issuance. (Effective until July 1, 2022.)](#794040---hearings-on-petitiongrounds-for-order-issuance-effective-until-july-1-2022)
* [7.94.050 - Ex parte orders. (Effective until July 1, 2022.)](#794050---ex-parte-orders-effective-until-july-1-2022)
* [7.94.060 - Service of orders. (Effective until July 1, 2022.)](#794060---service-of-orders-effective-until-july-1-2022)
* [7.94.070 - Service by publication or mail. (Effective until July 1, 2022.)](#794070---service-by-publication-or-mail-effective-until-july-1-2022)
* [7.94.080 - Termination and renewal of orders. (Effective until July 1, 2022.)](#794080---termination-and-renewal-of-orders-effective-until-july-1-2022)
* [7.94.090 - Firearms—Surrender. (Effective until July 1, 2022.)](#794090---firearmssurrender-effective-until-july-1-2022)
* [7.94.100 - Firearms—Return—Disposal. (Effective until July 1, 2022.)](#794100---firearmsreturndisposal-effective-until-july-1-2022)
* [7.94.110 - Reporting of orders. (Effective until July 1, 2022.)](#794110---reporting-of-orders-effective-until-july-1-2022)
* [7.94.120 - Penalties. (Effective until July 1, 2022.)](#794120---penalties-effective-until-july-1-2022)
* [7.94.130 - Other authority retained. (Effective until July 1, 2022.)](#794130---other-authority-retained-effective-until-july-1-2022)
* [7.94.140 - Liability. (Effective until July 1, 2022.)](#794140---liability-effective-until-july-1-2022)
* [7.94.150 - Instructional and informational material. (Effective until July 1, 2022.)](#794150---instructional-and-informational-material-effective-until-july-1-2022)
* [7.94.900 - Short title—2017 c 3 (Initiative Measure No. 1491). (Effective until July 1, 2022.)](#794900---short-title2017-c-3-initiative-measure-no-1491-effective-until-july-1-2022)
## 7.94.010 - Purpose—Intent. (Effective until July 1, 2022.)
1. Chapter 3, Laws of 2017 is designed to temporarily prevent individuals who are at high risk of harming themselves or others from accessing firearms by allowing family, household members, and police to obtain a court order when there is demonstrated evidence that the person poses a significant danger, including danger as a result of threatening or violent behavior.

2. Every year, over one hundred thousand people are victims of gunshot wounds and more than thirty thousand of those victims lose their lives. Over the last five years for which data is available, one hundred sixty-four thousand eight hundred twenty-one people in America were killed with firearms—an average of ninety-one deaths each day.

3. Studies show that individuals who engage in certain dangerous behaviors are significantly more likely to commit violence toward themselves or others in the near future. These behaviors, which can include other acts or threats of violence, self-harm, or the abuse of drugs or alcohol, are warning signs that the person may soon commit an act of violence.

4. Individuals who pose a danger to themselves or others often exhibit signs that alert family, household members, or law enforcement to the threat. Many mass shooters displayed warning signs prior to their killings, but federal and state laws provided no clear legal process to suspend the shooters' access to guns, even temporarily.

5. In enacting chapter 3, Laws of 2017, it is the purpose and intent of the people to reduce gun deaths and injuries, while respecting constitutional rights, by providing a court procedure for family, household members, and law enforcement to obtain an order temporarily restricting a person's access to firearms. Court orders are intended to be limited to situations in which the person poses a significant danger of harming themselves or others by possessing a firearm and include standards and safeguards to protect the rights of respondents and due process of law.

\[ [2019 c 246 § 1](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/2019-20/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/Senate/5027-S.SL.pdf?cite=2019%20c%20246%20§%201); 2017 c 3 § 1 (Initiative Measure No. 1491, approved November 8, 2016); \]

## 7.94.020 - Definitions. (Effective until July 1, 2022.)
The definitions in this section apply throughout this chapter unless the context clearly requires otherwise.

1. "Extreme risk protection order" means an ex parte temporary order or a final order granted under this chapter.

2. "Family or household member" means, with respect to a respondent, any: (a) Person related by blood, marriage, or adoption to the respondent; (b) dating partners of the respondent; (c) person who has a child in common with the respondent, regardless of whether such person has been married to the respondent or has lived together with the respondent at any time; (d) person who resides or has resided with the respondent within the past year; (e) domestic partner of the respondent; (f) person who has a biological or legal parent-child relationship with the respondent, including stepparents and stepchildren and grandparents and grandchildren; and (g) person who is acting or has acted as the respondent's legal guardian.

3. "Petitioner" means the person who petitions for an order under this chapter.

4. "Respondent" means the person who is identified as the respondent in a petition filed under this chapter.

\[ 2017 c 3 § 3 (Initiative Measure No. 1491, approved November 8, 2016); \]

## 7.94.030 - Petition for order. (Effective until July 1, 2022.)
There shall exist an action known as a petition for an extreme risk protection order.

1. A petition for an extreme risk protection order may be filed by (a) a family or household member of the respondent or (b) a law enforcement officer or agency.

2. A petition for an extreme risk protection order may be brought against a respondent under the age of eighteen years. No guardian or guardian ad litem need be appointed on behalf of a respondent to an action under this chapter if such respondent is sixteen years of age or older. If a guardian ad litem is appointed for the petitioner or respondent, the petitioner must not be required to pay any fee associated with such appointment.

3. An action under this chapter must be filed in the county where the petitioner resides or the county where the respondent resides.

4. A petition must:

    a.  Allege that the respondent poses a significant danger of causing personal injury to self or others by having in his or her custody or control, purchasing, possessing, accessing, or receiving a firearm, and be accompanied by an affidavit made under oath stating the specific statements, actions, or facts that give rise to a reasonable fear of future dangerous acts by the respondent;

    b.  Identify the number, types, and locations of any firearms the petitioner believes to be in the respondent's current ownership, possession, custody, access, or control;

    c.  Identify whether there is a known existing protection order governing the respondent, under chapter 7.90, 7.92, 10.14, 9A.46, 10.99, 26.50, or 26.52 RCW or under any other applicable statute; and

    d.  Identify whether there is a pending lawsuit, complaint, petition, or other action between the parties to the petition under the laws of Washington.

5. The court administrator shall verify the terms of any existing order governing the parties. The court may not delay granting relief because of the existence of a pending action between the parties or the necessity of verifying the terms of an existing order. A petition for an extreme risk protection order may be granted whether or not there is a pending action between the parties. Relief under this chapter must not be denied or delayed on the grounds that relief is available in another action.

6. If the petitioner is a law enforcement officer or agency, the petitioner shall make a good faith effort to provide notice to a family or household member of the respondent and to any known third party who may be at risk of violence. The notice must state that the petitioner intends to petition the court for an extreme risk protection order or has already done so, and include referrals to appropriate resources, including behavioral health, domestic violence, and counseling resources. The petitioner must attest in the petition to having provided such notice, or attest to the steps that will be taken to provide such notice.

7. If the petition states that disclosure of the petitioner's address would risk harm to the petitioner or any member of the petitioner's family or household, the petitioner's address may be omitted from all documents filed with the court. If the petitioner has not disclosed an address under this subsection, the petitioner must designate an alternative address at which the respondent may serve notice of any motions. If the petitioner is a law enforcement officer or agency, the address of record must be that of the law enforcement agency.

8. Within ninety days of receipt of the master copy from the administrative office of the courts, all court clerk's offices shall make available the standardized forms, instructions, and informational brochures required by RCW 7.94.150. Any assistance or information provided by clerks under this section does not constitute the practice of law and clerks are not responsible for incorrect information contained in a petition.

9. No fees for filing or service of process may be charged by a court or any public agency to petitioners seeking relief under this chapter. Petitioners shall be provided the necessary number of certified copies, forms, and instructional brochures free of charge.

10. A person is not required to post a bond to obtain relief in any proceeding under this section.

11. The superior courts of the state of Washington have jurisdiction over proceedings under this chapter. The juvenile court may hear a proceeding under this chapter if the respondent is under the age of eighteen years. Additionally, district and municipal courts have limited jurisdiction over issuance and enforcement of ex parte extreme risk protection orders issued under RCW 7.94.050. The district or municipal court shall set the full hearing provided for in RCW 7.94.040 in superior court and transfer the case. If the notice and order are not served on the respondent in time for the full hearing, the issuing court has concurrent jurisdiction with the superior court to extend the ex parte extreme risk protection order.

12. [Empty]

    a.  Any person restrained by an extreme risk protection order against a respondent under the age of eighteen may petition the court to have the court records sealed from public view at the time of issuance of the full order, at any time during the life of the order, or at any time after its expiration.

    b.  The court shall seal the court records from public view if there are no other active protection orders against the restrained party, no pending violations of the order, and evidence of full compliance with the relinquishment of firearms as ordered by the extreme risk protection order.

    c.  Nothing in this subsection changes the requirement for the order to be entered into and maintained in computer-based systems as required in RCW 7.94.110.

13. The court shall give law enforcement priority at any extreme risk protection order calendar because of the importance of immediate temporary removal of firearms in situations of extreme risk and the goal of minimizing the time law enforcement must otherwise wait for a particular case to be called, which can hinder their other patrol and supervisory duties. In the alternative, the court may allow a law enforcement petitioner to participate telephonically, or allow another representative from that law enforcement agency or the prosecutor's office to present the information to the court if personal presence of the petitioning officer is not required for testimonial purposes.

14. Recognizing that an extreme risk protection order may need to be issued outside of normal business hours, courts shall allow law enforcement petitioners to petition after-hours for an ex parte extreme risk protection order using an on-call, after-hours judge, as is done for approval of after-hours search warrants.

\[ [2019 c 246 § 2](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/2019-20/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/Senate/5027-S.SL.pdf?cite=2019%20c%20246%20§%202); 2017 c 3 § 4 (Initiative Measure No. 1491, approved November 8, 2016); \]

## 7.94.040 - Hearings on petition—Grounds for order issuance. (Effective until July 1, 2022.)
1. Upon receipt of the petition, the court shall order a hearing to be held not later than fourteen days from the date of the order and issue a notice of hearing to the respondent for the same.

    a.  The court may schedule a hearing by telephone pursuant to local court rule, to reasonably accommodate a disability, or in exceptional circumstances to protect a petitioner from potential harm. The court shall require assurances of the petitioner's identity before conducting a telephonic hearing.

    b.  The court clerk shall cause a copy of the notice of hearing and petition to be forwarded on or before the next judicial day to the appropriate law enforcement agency for service upon the respondent.

    c.  Personal service of the notice of hearing and petition shall be made upon the respondent by a law enforcement officer not less than five court days prior to the hearing. Service issued under this section takes precedence over the service of other documents, unless the other documents are of a similar emergency nature. If timely personal service cannot be made, the court shall set a new hearing date and shall either require additional attempts at obtaining personal service or permit service by publication or mail as provided in RCW 7.94.070. The court shall not require more than two attempts at obtaining personal service and shall permit service by publication or mail after two attempts at obtaining personal service unless the petitioner requests additional time to attempt personal service. If the court issues an order permitting service by publication or mail, the court shall set the hearing date not later than twenty-four days from the date the order issues.

    d.  The court may, as provided in RCW 7.94.050, issue an ex parte extreme risk protection order pending the hearing ordered under this subsection (1). Such ex parte order must be served concurrently with the notice of hearing and petition.

2. Upon hearing the matter, if the court finds by a preponderance of the evidence that the respondent poses a significant danger of causing personal injury to self or others by having in his or her custody or control, purchasing, possessing, or receiving a firearm, the court shall issue an extreme risk protection order for a period of one year.

3. In determining whether grounds for an extreme risk protection order exist, the court may consider any relevant evidence including, but not limited to, any of the following:

    a.  A recent act or threat of violence by the respondent against self or others, whether or not such violence or threat of violence involves a firearm;

    b.  A pattern of acts or threats of violence by the respondent within the past twelve months including, but not limited to, acts or threats of violence by the respondent against self or others;

    c.  Any behaviors that present an imminent threat of harm to self or others;

    d.  A violation by the respondent of a protection order or a no-contact order issued under chapter 7.90, 7.92, 10.14, 9A.46, 10.99, 26.50, or 26.52 RCW;

    e.  A previous or existing extreme risk protection order issued against the respondent;

    f.  A violation of a previous or existing extreme risk protection order issued against the respondent;

    g.  A conviction of the respondent for a crime that constitutes domestic violence as defined in RCW 10.99.020;

    h.  A conviction of the respondent under RCW 9A.36.080;

    i.  The respondent's ownership, access to, or intent to possess firearms;

    j.  The unlawful or reckless use, display, or brandishing of a firearm by the respondent;

    k.  The history of use, attempted use, or threatened use of physical force by the respondent against another person, or the respondent's history of stalking another person;

    l.  Any prior arrest of the respondent for a felony offense or violent crime;

    m.  Corroborated evidence of the abuse of controlled substances or alcohol by the respondent; and

    n.  Evidence of recent acquisition of firearms by the respondent.

4. The court may:

    a.  Examine under oath the petitioner, the respondent, and any witnesses they may produce, or, in lieu of examination, consider sworn affidavits of the petitioner, the respondent, and any witnesses they may produce; and

    b.  Ensure that a reasonable search has been conducted for criminal history records related to the respondent.

5. In a hearing under this chapter, the rules of evidence apply to the same extent as in a domestic violence protection order proceeding under chapter 26.50 RCW.

6. During the hearing, the court shall consider whether a behavioral health evaluation is appropriate, and may order such evaluation if appropriate.

7. An extreme risk protection order must include:

    a.  A statement of the grounds supporting the issuance of the order;

    b.  The date and time the order was issued;

    c.  The date and time the order expires;

    d.  Whether a behavioral health evaluation of the respondent is required;

    e.  The address of the court in which any responsive pleading should be filed;

    f.  A description of the requirements for relinquishment of firearms under RCW 7.94.090; and

    g.  The following statement: "To the subject of this protection order: This order will last until the date and time noted above. If you have not done so already, you must surrender to the (insert name of local law enforcement agency) all firearms in your custody, control, or possession and any concealed pistol license issued to you under RCW 9.41.070 immediately. You may not have in your custody or control, purchase, possess, receive, or attempt to purchase or receive, a firearm while this order is in effect. You have the right to request one hearing to terminate this order every twelve-month period that this order is in effect, starting from the date of this order and continuing through any renewals. You may seek the advice of an attorney as to any matter connected with this order."

8. When the court issues an extreme risk protection order, the court shall inform the respondent that he or she is entitled to request termination of the order in the manner prescribed by RCW 7.94.080. The court shall provide the respondent with a form to request a termination hearing.

9. If the court declines to issue an extreme risk protection order, the court shall state the particular reasons for the court's denial.

\[ [2019 c 246 § 3](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/2019-20/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/Senate/5027-S.SL.pdf?cite=2019%20c%20246%20§%203); 2017 c 3 § 5 (Initiative Measure No. 1491, approved November 8, 2016); \]

## 7.94.050 - Ex parte orders. (Effective until July 1, 2022.)
1. A petitioner may request that an ex parte extreme risk protection order be issued before a hearing for an extreme risk protection order, without notice to the respondent, by including in the petition detailed allegations based on personal knowledge that the respondent poses a significant danger of causing personal injury to self or others in the near future by having in his or her custody or control, purchasing, possessing, or receiving a firearm.

2. In considering whether to issue an ex parte extreme risk protection order under this section, the court shall consider all relevant evidence, including the evidence described in RCW 7.94.040(3).

3. If a court finds there is reasonable cause to believe that the respondent poses a significant danger of causing personal injury to self or others in the near future by having in his or her custody or control, purchasing, possessing, or receiving a firearm, the court shall issue an ex parte extreme risk protection order.

4. The court shall hold an ex parte extreme risk protection order hearing in person or by telephone on the day the petition is filed or on the judicial day immediately following the day the petition is filed.

5. In accordance with RCW 7.94.040(1), the court shall schedule a hearing within fourteen days of the issuance of an ex parte extreme risk protection order to determine if a one-year extreme risk protection order should be issued under this chapter.

6. An ex parte extreme risk protection order shall include:

    a.  A statement of the grounds asserted for the order;

    b.  The date and time the order was issued;

    c.  The date and time the order expires;

    d.  The address of the court in which any responsive pleading should be filed;

    e.  The date and time of the scheduled hearing;

    f.  A description of the requirements for surrender of firearms under RCW 7.94.090; and

    g.  The following statement: "To the subject of this protection order: This order is valid until the date and time noted above. You are required to surrender all firearms in your custody, control, or possession. You may not have in your custody or control, purchase, possess, receive, or attempt to purchase or receive, a firearm while this order is in effect. You must surrender to the (insert name of local law enforcement agency) all firearms in your custody, control, or possession and any concealed pistol license issued to you under RCW 9.41.070 immediately. A hearing will be held on the date and at the time noted above to determine if an extreme risk protection order should be issued. Failure to appear at that hearing may result in a court making an order against you that is valid for one year. You may seek the advice of an attorney as to any matter connected with this order."

7. Any ex parte extreme risk protection order issued expires upon the hearing on the extreme risk protection order.

8. An ex parte extreme risk protection order shall be served by a law enforcement officer in the same manner as provided for in RCW 7.94.040 for service of the notice of hearing and petition, and shall be served concurrently with the notice of hearing and petition.

9. If the court declines to issue an ex parte extreme risk protection order, the court shall state the particular reasons for the court's denial.

\[ 2017 c 3 § 6 (Initiative Measure No. 1491, approved November 8, 2016); \]

## 7.94.060 - Service of orders. (Effective until July 1, 2022.)
1. An extreme risk protection order issued under RCW 7.94.040 must be personally served upon the respondent, except as otherwise provided in this chapter.

2. The law enforcement agency with jurisdiction in the area in which the respondent resides shall serve the respondent personally, unless the petitioner elects to have the respondent served by a private party.

3. If service by a law enforcement agency is to be used, the clerk of the court shall cause a copy of the order issued under this chapter to be forwarded on or before the next judicial day to the law enforcement agency specified in the order for service upon the respondent. Service of an order issued under this chapter takes precedence over the service of other documents, unless the other documents are of a similar emergency nature.

4. If the law enforcement agency cannot complete service upon the respondent within ten days, the law enforcement agency shall notify the petitioner. The petitioner shall provide information sufficient to permit such notification.

5. If an order entered by the court recites that the respondent appeared in person before the court, the necessity for further service is waived and proof of service of that order is not necessary.

6. If the court previously entered an order allowing service of the notice of hearing and petition, or an ex parte extreme risk protection order, by publication or mail under RCW 7.94.070, or if the court finds there are now grounds to allow such alternate service, the court may permit service by publication or mail of the extreme risk protection order issued under this chapter as provided in RCW 7.94.070. The court order must state whether the court permitted service by publication or service by mail.

7. [Empty]

    a.  When an extreme risk protection order is issued against a minor under the age of eighteen, a copy of the order must be served on the parent or guardian of the minor at any address where the minor resides, or the department of children, youth, and families in the case where the minor is the subject of a dependency or court approved out-of-home placement.

    b.  The court shall provide written notice of the legal obligation to safely secure any firearm on the premises and the potential for criminal prosecution if a prohibited person were to obtain access to the firearm as provided in RCW 9.41.360, which shall be served by law enforcement on the parent or guardian of the minor at any address where the minor resides, or the department of children, youth, and families in the case where the minor is the subject of a dependency or court approved out-of-home placement. Notice may be provided at the time the parent or guardian of the respondent appears in court or may be served along with a copy of the order.

8. Returns of service under this chapter must be made in accordance with the applicable court rules.

\[ [2019 c 246 § 4](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/2019-20/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/Senate/5027-S.SL.pdf?cite=2019%20c%20246%20§%204); 2017 c 3 § 7 (Initiative Measure No. 1491, approved November 8, 2016); \]

## 7.94.070 - Service by publication or mail. (Effective until July 1, 2022.)
1. The court may order service by publication or service by mail under the circumstances permitted for such service in RCW 7.90.052, 7.90.053, 26.50.123, or 26.50.085, except any summons must be essentially in the following form:

In the  . . . . . . . . . court of the state of Washington for the county of  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . ., Petitioner vs.     No.  . . . . . . .  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . ., Respondent The state of Washington to  . . . . . . . . . (respondent):You are hereby summoned to appear on the  . . . . day of  . . . . . ., (year) . . . ., at  . . . . a.m./p.m., and respond to the petition. If you fail to respond, an extreme risk protection order may be issued against you pursuant to the provisions of the extreme risk protection order act, chapter 7.94 RCW, for one year from the date you are required to appear. (An ex parte extreme risk protection order has been issued against you, restraining you from having in your custody or control, purchasing, possessing, or receiving any firearms. You must surrender to the (insert name of local law enforcement agency) all firearms in your custody, control, or possession and any concealed pistol license issued to you under RCW 9.41.070 within forty-eight hours. A copy of the notice of hearing, petition, and ex parte extreme risk protection order has been filed with the clerk of this court.) (A copy of the notice of hearing and petition has been filed with the clerk of this court.)  . . . . . . . . Petitioner

In the  . . . . . . . . . court of the state of Washington for the county of  . . . . . . . . .

 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . ., Petitioner

 

vs.     No.  . . . . . . .

 

 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . ., Respondent

 

The state of Washington to  . . . . . . . . . (respondent):

You are hereby summoned to appear on the  . . . . day of  . . . . . ., (year) . . . ., at  . . . . a.m./p.m., and respond to the petition. If you fail to respond, an extreme risk protection order may be issued against you pursuant to the provisions of the extreme risk protection order act, chapter 7.94 RCW, for one year from the date you are required to appear. (An ex parte extreme risk protection order has been issued against you, restraining you from having in your custody or control, purchasing, possessing, or receiving any firearms. You must surrender to the (insert name of local law enforcement agency) all firearms in your custody, control, or possession and any concealed pistol license issued to you under RCW 9.41.070 within forty-eight hours. A copy of the notice of hearing, petition, and ex parte extreme risk protection order has been filed with the clerk of this court.) (A copy of the notice of hearing and petition has been filed with the clerk of this court.)

 

 . . . . . . . .

 

Petitioner

2. If the court orders service by publication or mail for notice of an extreme risk protection order hearing, it shall also reissue the ex parte extreme risk protection order, if issued, to expire on the date of the extreme risk protection order hearing.

3. Following completion of service by publication or by mail for notice of an extreme risk protection order hearing, if the respondent fails to appear at the hearing, the court may issue an extreme risk protection order as provided in RCW 7.94.040.

\[ 2017 c 3 § 8 (Initiative Measure No. 1491, approved November 8, 2016); \]

## 7.94.080 - Termination and renewal of orders. (Effective until July 1, 2022.)
1. The respondent may submit one written request for a hearing to terminate an extreme risk protection order issued under this chapter every twelve-month period that the order is in effect, starting from the date of the order and continuing through any renewals.

    a.  Upon receipt of the request for a hearing to terminate an extreme risk protection order, the court shall set a date for a hearing. Notice of the request must be served on the petitioner in accordance with RCW 4.28.080. The hearing shall occur no sooner than fourteen days and no later than thirty days from the date of service of the request upon the petitioner.

    b.  The respondent shall have the burden of proving by a preponderance of the evidence that the respondent does not pose a significant danger of causing personal injury to self or others by having in his or her custody or control, purchasing, possessing, or receiving a firearm. The court may consider any relevant evidence, including evidence of the considerations listed in RCW 7.94.040(3).

    c.  If the court finds after the hearing that the respondent has met his or her burden, the court shall terminate the order.

2. The court must notify the petitioner of the impending expiration of an extreme risk protection order. Notice must be received by the petitioner one hundred five calendar days before the date the order expires.

3. A family or household member of a respondent or a law enforcement officer or agency may by motion request a renewal of an extreme risk protection order at any time within one hundred five calendar days before the expiration of the order.

    a.  Upon receipt of the motion to renew, the court shall order that a hearing be held not later than fourteen days from the date the order issues.

        i.  The court may schedule a hearing by telephone in the manner prescribed by RCW 7.94.040(1)(a).

        ii.  The respondent shall be personally served in the same manner prescribed by RCW 7.94.040(1) (b) and (c).

    b.  In determining whether to renew an extreme risk protection order issued under this section, the court shall consider all relevant evidence presented by the petitioner and follow the same procedure as provided in RCW 7.94.040.

    c.  If the court finds by a preponderance of the evidence that the requirements for issuance of an extreme risk protection order as provided in RCW 7.94.040 continue to be met, the court shall renew the order. However, if, after notice, the motion for renewal is uncontested and the petitioner seeks no modification of the order, the order may be renewed on the basis of the petitioner's motion or affidavit stating that there has been no material change in relevant circumstances since entry of the order and stating the reason for the requested renewal.

    d.  The renewal of an extreme risk protection order has a duration of one year, subject to termination as provided in subsection (1) of this section or further renewal by order of the court.

\[ 2017 c 3 § 9 (Initiative Measure No. 1491, approved November 8, 2016); \]

## 7.94.090 - Firearms—Surrender. (Effective until July 1, 2022.)
1. Upon issuance of any extreme risk protection order under this chapter, including an ex parte extreme risk protection order, the court shall order the respondent to surrender to the local law enforcement agency all firearms in the respondent's custody, control, or possession and any concealed pistol license issued under RCW 9.41.070.

2. The law enforcement officer serving any extreme risk protection order under this chapter, including an ex parte extreme risk protection order, shall request that the respondent immediately surrender all firearms in his or her custody, control, or possession and any concealed pistol license issued under RCW 9.41.070, and conduct any search permitted by law for such firearms. The law enforcement officer shall take possession of all firearms belonging to the respondent that are surrendered, in plain sight, or discovered pursuant to a lawful search. The order must be personally served upon the respondent or defendant if the order is entered in open court in the presence of the respondent or defendant. The respondent or defendant shall acknowledge receipt and service. If the respondent or defendant refuses service, an agent of the court may indicate on the record that the respondent or defendant refused service. The court shall enter the service and receipt into the record. A copy of the order and service shall be transmitted immediately to law enforcement. Alternatively, if personal service by a law enforcement officer is not possible, the respondent shall surrender the firearms in a safe manner to the control of the local law enforcement agency within forty-eight hours of being served with the order by alternate service.

3. At the time of surrender, a law enforcement officer taking possession of a firearm or concealed pistol license shall issue a receipt identifying all firearms that have been surrendered and provide a copy of the receipt to the respondent. Within seventy-two hours after service of the order, the officer serving the order shall file the original receipt with the court and shall ensure that his or her law enforcement agency retains a copy of the receipt.

4. Upon the sworn statement or testimony of the petitioner or of any law enforcement officer alleging that the respondent has failed to comply with the surrender of firearms as required by an order issued under this chapter, the court shall determine whether probable cause exists to believe that the respondent has failed to surrender all firearms in his or her possession, custody, or control. If probable cause exists, the court shall issue a warrant describing the firearms and authorizing a search of the locations where the firearms are reasonably believed to be and the seizure of any firearms discovered pursuant to such search.

5. If a person other than the respondent claims title to any firearms surrendered pursuant to this section, and he or she is determined by the law enforcement agency to be the lawful owner of the firearm, the firearm shall be returned to him or her, provided that:

    a.  The firearm is removed from the respondent's custody, control, or possession and the lawful owner agrees to store the firearm in a manner such that the respondent does not have access to or control of the firearm; and

    b.  The firearm is not otherwise unlawfully possessed by the owner.

6. Upon the issuance of a one-year extreme risk protection order, the court shall order a new compliance review hearing date and require the respondent to appear not later than three judicial days from the issuance of the order. The court shall require a showing that the respondent has surrendered any firearms in the respondent's custody, control, or possession, and any concealed pistol license issued under RCW 9.41.070 to a law enforcement agency. The court may dismiss the hearing upon a satisfactory showing that the respondent has timely and completely surrendered all firearms in the respondent's custody, control, or possession and any concealed pistol license issued under RCW 9.41.070 to a law enforcement agency, and is in compliance with the order. If the court does not have a sufficient record before it on which to make such a finding, the court must set a review hearing to occur as soon as possible, at which the respondent must be present and provide proof of compliance with the court's order.

7. [Empty]

    a.  If a court finds at the compliance review hearing, or any other hearing where compliance with the order is addressed, that there is probable cause to believe the respondent was aware of and failed to fully comply with the order, failed to appear at the compliance review hearing, or violated the order after the court entered findings of compliance, pursuant to its authority under chapter 7.21 RCW, the court may initiate a contempt proceeding on its own motion, or upon the motion of the prosecutor, city attorney, or the petitioner's counsel, to impose remedial sanctions, and issue an order requiring the respondent to appear, provide proof of compliance with the order, and show cause why the respondent should not be held in contempt of court.

    b.  If the respondent is not present in court at the compliance review hearing or if the court issues an order to appear and show cause after a compliance review hearing, the clerk of the court shall electronically transmit a copy of the order to show cause to the law enforcement agency where the respondent resides for personal service or service in the manner provided in the civil rules of superior court or applicable statute.

    c.  The order to show cause served upon the respondent shall state the date, time, and location of the hearing and shall include a warning that the respondent may be held in contempt of court if the respondent fails to promptly comply with the terms of the extreme risk protection order and a warning that an arrest warrant could be issued if the respondent fails to appear on the date and time provided in the order to show cause.

    d.  [Empty]

        i.  At the show cause hearing, the respondent must be present and provide proof of compliance with the extreme risk protection order and demonstrate why the relief requested should not be granted.

        ii.  The court shall take judicial notice of the receipt filed with the court by the law enforcement agency pursuant to subsection (3) of this section. The court shall also provide sufficient notice to the law enforcement agency of the hearing. Upon receiving notice pursuant to this subsection, a law enforcement agency must:

            A.  Provide the court with a complete list of firearms surrendered by the respondent or otherwise belonging to the respondent that are in the possession of the law enforcement agency; and

            B.  Provide the court with verification that any concealed pistol license issued to the respondent has been surrendered and the agency with authority to revoke the license has been notified.

        iii.  If the law enforcement agency has a reasonable suspicion that the respondent is not in full compliance with the terms of the order, the law enforcement agency must submit the basis for its belief to the court, and may do so through the filing of an affidavit.

    e.  If the court finds the respondent in contempt, the court may impose remedial sanctions designed to ensure swift compliance with the order to surrender weapons.

    f.  The court may order a respondent found in contempt of the order to pay for any losses incurred by a party in connection with the contempt proceeding, including reasonable attorneys' fees, service fees, and other costs. The costs of the proceeding shall not be borne by the petitioner.

8. All law enforcement agencies must develop policies and procedures by June 1, 2017, regarding the acceptance, storage, and return of firearms required to be surrendered under this chapter. A law enforcement agency holding any surrendered firearm or concealed pistol license shall comply with the provisions of RCW 9.41.340 and 9.41.345 before the return of the firearm or concealed pistol license to the owner or individual from whom it was obtained.

\[ [2020 c 126 § 2](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/2019-20/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/House/2622-S.SL.pdf?cite=2020%20c%20126%20§%202); 2017 c 3 § 10 (Initiative Measure No. 1491, approved November 8, 2016); \]

## 7.94.100 - Firearms—Return—Disposal. (Effective until July 1, 2022.)
1. If an extreme risk protection order is terminated or expires without renewal, a law enforcement agency holding any firearm that has been surrendered pursuant to this chapter shall return any surrendered firearm requested by a respondent only after confirming, through a background check, that the respondent is currently eligible to own or possess firearms under federal and state law and after confirming with the court that the extreme risk protection order has terminated or has expired without renewal.

2. A law enforcement agency must, if requested, provide prior notice of the return of a firearm to a respondent to family or household members of the respondent in the manner provided in RCW 9.41.340 and 9.41.345.

3. Any firearm surrendered by a respondent pursuant to RCW 7.94.090 that remains unclaimed by the lawful owner shall be disposed of in accordance with the law enforcement agency's policies and procedures for the disposal of firearms in police custody.

\[ 2017 c 3 § 11 (Initiative Measure No. 1491, approved November 8, 2016); \]

## 7.94.110 - Reporting of orders. (Effective until July 1, 2022.)
1. The clerk of the court shall enter any extreme risk protection order or ex parte extreme risk protection order issued under this chapter into a statewide judicial information system on the same day such order is issued.

2. The clerk of the court shall forward a copy of an order issued under this chapter the same day such order is issued to the appropriate law enforcement agency specified in the order. Upon receipt of the copy of the order, the law enforcement agency shall enter the order into the national instant criminal background check system, any other federal or state computer-based systems used by law enforcement or others to identify prohibited purchasers of firearms, and any computer-based criminal intelligence information system available in this state used by law enforcement agencies to list outstanding warrants. The order must remain in each system for the period stated in the order, and the law enforcement agency shall only expunge orders from the systems that have expired or terminated. Entry into the computer-based criminal intelligence information system constitutes notice to all law enforcement agencies of the existence of the order. The order is fully enforceable in any county in the state.

3. The issuing court shall, within three judicial days after issuance of an extreme risk protection order or ex parte extreme risk protection order, forward a copy of the respondent's driver's license or identicard, or comparable information, along with the date of order issuance, to the department of licensing. Upon receipt of the information, the department of licensing shall determine if the respondent has a concealed pistol license. If the respondent does have a concealed pistol license, the department of licensing shall immediately notify the license-issuing authority which, upon receipt of such notification, shall immediately revoke the license.

4. If an extreme risk protection order is terminated before its expiration date, the clerk of the court shall forward the same day a copy of the termination order to the department of licensing and the appropriate law enforcement agency specified in the termination order. Upon receipt of the order, the law enforcement agency shall promptly remove the order from any computer-based system in which it was entered pursuant to subsection (2) of this section.

\[ 2017 c 3 § 12 (Initiative Measure No. 1491, approved November 8, 2016); \]

## 7.94.120 - Penalties. (Effective until July 1, 2022.)
1. Any person who files a petition under this chapter knowing the information in such petition to be materially false, or with intent to harass the respondent, is guilty of a gross misdemeanor.

2. Any person who has in his or her custody or control, purchases, possesses, or receives a firearm with knowledge that he or she is prohibited from doing so by an order issued under this chapter is guilty of a gross misdemeanor, and further is prohibited from having in his or her custody or control, purchasing, possessing, or receiving, or attempting to purchase or receive, a firearm for a period of five years from the date the existing order expires. However, such person is guilty of a class C felony if the person has two or more previous convictions for violating an order issued under this chapter.

\[ 2017 c 3 § 13 (Initiative Measure No. 1491, approved November 8, 2016); \]

## 7.94.130 - Other authority retained. (Effective until July 1, 2022.)
This chapter does not affect the ability of a law enforcement officer to remove a firearm or concealed pistol license from any person or conduct any search and seizure for firearms pursuant to other lawful authority.

\[ 2017 c 3 § 14 (Initiative Measure No. 1491, approved November 8, 2016); \]

## 7.94.140 - Liability. (Effective until July 1, 2022.)
Except as provided in RCW 7.94.120, this chapter does not impose criminal or civil liability on any person or entity for acts or omissions related to obtaining an extreme risk protection order or ex parte extreme risk protection [order] including, but not limited to, reporting, declining to report, investigating, declining to investigate, filing, or declining to file a petition under this chapter.

\[ 2017 c 3 § 15 (Initiative Measure No. 1491, approved November 8, 2016); \]

## 7.94.150 - Instructional and informational material. (Effective until July 1, 2022.)
1. The administrative office of the courts shall develop and prepare instructions and informational brochures, standard petitions and extreme risk protection order forms, and a court staff handbook on the extreme risk protection order process. The standard petition and order forms must be used after June 1, 2017, for all petitions filed and orders issued under this chapter. The instructions, brochures, forms, and handbook shall be prepared in consultation with interested persons, including representatives of gun violence prevention groups, judges, and law enforcement personnel. Materials must be based on best practices and available electronically online to the public.

    a.  The instructions must be designed to assist petitioners in completing the petition, and must include a sample of a standard petition and order for protection forms.

    b.  The instructions and standard petition must include a means for the petitioner to identify, with only lay knowledge, the firearms the respondent may own, possess, receive, or have in his or her custody or control. The instructions must provide pictures of types of firearms that the petitioner may choose from to identify the relevant firearms, or an equivalent means to allow petitioners to identify firearms without requiring specific or technical knowledge regarding the firearms.

    c.  The informational brochure must describe the use of and the process for obtaining, modifying, and terminating an extreme risk protection order under this chapter, and provide relevant forms.

    d.  The extreme risk protection order form must include, in a conspicuous location, notice of criminal penalties resulting from violation of the order, and the following statement: "You have the sole responsibility to avoid or refrain from violating this order's provisions. Only the court can change the order and only upon written application."

    e.  The court staff handbook must allow for the addition of a community resource list by the court clerk.

2. All court clerks may create a community resource list of crisis intervention, behavioral health, interpreter, counseling, and other relevant resources serving the county in which the court is located. The court may make the community resource list available as part of or in addition to the informational brochures described in subsection (1) of this section.

3. The administrative office of the courts shall distribute a master copy of the petition and order forms, instructions, and informational brochures to all court clerks and shall distribute a master copy of the petition and order forms to all superior, district, and municipal courts. Distribution of all documents shall, at a minimum, be in an electronic format or formats accessible to all courts and court clerks in the state.

4. For purposes of this section, "court clerks" means court administrators in courts of limited jurisdiction and elected court clerks.

5. The administrative office of the courts shall determine the significant non-English-speaking or limited English-speaking populations in the state. The administrator shall then arrange for translation of the instructions and informational brochures required by this section, which shall contain a sample of the standard petition and order for protection forms, into the languages spoken by those significant non-English-speaking populations and shall distribute a master copy of the translated instructions and informational brochures to all court clerks by December 1, 2017.

6. The administrative office of the courts shall update the instructions, brochures, standard petition and extreme risk protection order forms, and court staff handbook as necessary, including when changes in the law make an update necessary.

7. Consistent with the provisions of this section, the administrative office of the courts shall develop and prepare:

    a.  A standard petition and order form for an extreme risk protection order sought against a respondent under eighteen years of age, titled "Extreme Risk Protection Order - Respondent Under 18 Years";

    b.  Pattern forms to assist in streamlining the process for those persons who are eligible to seal records relating to an order under (a) of this subsection, including:

        i.  A petition and declaration the respondent can complete to ensure that requirements for public sealing have been met; and

        ii.  An order sealing the court records relating to that order; and

    c.  An informational brochure to be served on any respondent who is subject to a temporary or full order under (a) of this subsection.

\[ [2019 c 246 § 5](http://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/2019-20/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/Senate/5027-S.SL.pdf?cite=2019%20c%20246%20§%205); 2017 c 3 § 16 (Initiative Measure No. 1491, approved November 8, 2016); \]

## 7.94.900 - Short title—2017 c 3 (Initiative Measure No. 1491). (Effective until July 1, 2022.)
Chapter 3, Laws of 2017 may be known and cited as the extreme risk protection order act.

\[ 2017 c 3 § 2 (Initiative Measure No. 1491, approved November 8, 2016); \]

