# 7.92 - Jennifer Paulson stalking protection order act.
* [7.92.010 - Intent—Finding. (Effective until July 1, 2022.)](#792010---intentfinding-effective-until-july-1-2022)
* [7.92.020 - Definitions. (Effective until July 1, 2022.)](#792020---definitions-effective-until-july-1-2022)
* [7.92.030 - Petition for stalking protection order—Creation—Contents. (Effective until July 1, 2022.)](#792030---petition-for-stalking-protection-ordercreationcontents-effective-until-july-1-2022)
* [7.92.040 - Petition—Who may file. (Effective until July 1, 2022.)](#792040---petitionwho-may-file-effective-until-july-1-2022)
* [7.92.050 - Petition—Additional requirements. (Effective until July 1, 2022.)](#792050---petitionadditional-requirements-effective-until-july-1-2022)
* [7.92.060 - Petition—Hearings prior to issuance of protection order. (Effective until July 1, 2022.)](#792060---petitionhearings-prior-to-issuance-of-protection-order-effective-until-july-1-2022)
* [7.92.070 - Consultation with judicial information system. (Effective until July 1, 2022.)](#792070---consultation-with-judicial-information-system-effective-until-july-1-2022)
* [7.92.080 - Fees not permitted. (Effective until July 1, 2022.)](#792080---fees-not-permitted-effective-until-july-1-2022)
* [7.92.090 - Victim's advocates. (Effective until July 1, 2022.)](#792090---victims-advocates-effective-until-july-1-2022)
* [7.92.100 - Burden of proof—Issuance of protection order—Remedies. (Effective until July 1, 2022.)](#792100---burden-of-proofissuance-of-protection-orderremedies-effective-until-july-1-2022)
* [7.92.110 - Accountability for conduct of others. (Effective until July 1, 2022.)](#792110---accountability-for-conduct-of-others-effective-until-july-1-2022)
* [7.92.120 - Ex parte temporary order for protection—Issuance. (Effective until July 1, 2022.)](#792120---ex-parte-temporary-order-for-protectionissuance-effective-until-july-1-2022)
* [7.92.125 - Ex parte temporary order—Admissibility in subsequent civil actions. (Effective until July 1, 2022.)](#792125---ex-parte-temporary-orderadmissibility-in-subsequent-civil-actions-effective-until-july-1-2022)
* [7.92.130 - Protection orders—Duration. (Effective until July 1, 2022.)](#792130---protection-ordersduration-effective-until-july-1-2022)
* [7.92.140 - Protection order—Contents. (Effective until July 1, 2022.)](#792140---protection-ordercontents-effective-until-july-1-2022)
* [7.92.150 - Protection orders—Service to respondent—Service by publication. (Effective until July 1, 2022.)](#792150---protection-ordersservice-to-respondentservice-by-publication-effective-until-july-1-2022)
* [7.92.160 - Court-initiated stalking no-contact orders. (Effective until July 1, 2022. Recodified as RCW  9A.46.055.)](#792160---court-initiated-stalking-no-contact-orders-effective-until-july-1-2022-recodified-as-rcw--9a46055)
* [7.92.170 - Personal jurisdiction by court over nonresident individuals. (Effective until July 1, 2022.)](#792170---personal-jurisdiction-by-court-over-nonresident-individuals-effective-until-july-1-2022)
* [7.92.180 - Copy of order to be forwarded to law enforcement agency—Entry of information into computer-based information systems. (Effective until July 1, 2022.)](#792180---copy-of-order-to-be-forwarded-to-law-enforcement-agencyentry-of-information-into-computer-based-information-systems-effective-until-july-1-2022)
* [7.92.190 - Modification or termination of protection orders. (Effective until July 1, 2022.)](#792190---modification-or-termination-of-protection-orders-effective-until-july-1-2022)
* [7.92.900 - Construction—Filing of criminal charges not required. (Effective until July 1, 2022.)](#792900---constructionfiling-of-criminal-charges-not-required-effective-until-july-1-2022)
* [7.92.901 - Short title. (Effective until July 1, 2022.)](#792901---short-title-effective-until-july-1-2022)
## 7.92.010 - Intent—Finding. (Effective until July 1, 2022.)
Stalking is a crime that affects 3.4 million people over the age of eighteen each year in the United States. Almost half of those victims experience at least one unwanted contact per week. Twenty-nine percent of stalking victims fear that the stalking will never stop. The prevalence of anxiety, insomnia, social dysfunction, and severe depression is much higher among stalking victims than the general population. Three in four stalking victims are stalked by someone they know, and at least thirty percent of stalking victims are stalked by a current or former intimate partner. For many of those victims, the domestic violence protection order is a tool they can access to help them stay safer. For those who have not had an intimate relationship with the person stalking them, there are few remedies for them under the law. Victims who do not report the crime still desire safety and protection from future interactions with the offender. Some cases in which the stalking is reported are not prosecuted. In these situations, the victim should be able to seek a civil remedy requiring that the offender stay away from the victim. It is the intent of the legislature that the stalking protection order created by this chapter be a remedy for victims who do not qualify for a domestic violence order of protection. Moreover, it is the intent of the legislature that courts specifically distinguish stalking conduct covered by the stalking protection order from common acts of harassment or nuisance covered by antiharassment orders. Law enforcement agencies need to be able to rely on orders that distinguish stalking conduct from common acts of harassment or nuisance. Victims of stalking conduct deserve the same protection and access to the court system as victims of domestic violence and sexual assault, and this protection can be accomplished without infringing on constitutionally protected speech or activity. The legislature finds that preventing the issuance of conflicting orders is in the interest of both petitioners and respondents.

\[ [2013 c 84 § 1](https://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/2013-14/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/House/1383-S.SL.pdf?cite=2013%20c%2084%20§%201); \]

## 7.92.020 - Definitions. (Effective until July 1, 2022.)
The definitions in this section apply throughout this chapter unless the context clearly requires otherwise.

1. "Electronic monitoring" means the same as in RCW 9.94A.030.

2. "Minor" means a person who is under eighteen years of age.

3. "Petitioner" means any named petitioner for the stalking protection order or any named victim of stalking conduct on whose behalf the petition is brought.

4. "Stalking conduct" means any of the following:

   a. Any act of stalking as defined under RCW 9A.46.110;

   b. Any act of cyberstalking as defined under RCW 9.61.260;

   c. Any course of conduct involving repeated or continuing contacts, attempts to contact, monitoring, tracking, keeping under observation, or following of another that:

      i. Would cause a reasonable person to feel intimidated, frightened, or threatened and that actually causes such a feeling;

      ii. Serves no lawful purpose; and

      iii. The stalker knows or reasonably should know threatens, frightens, or intimidates the person, even if the stalker did not intend to intimidate, frighten, or threaten the person.

5. "Stalking no-contact order" means a temporary order or a final order granted under this chapter against a person charged with or arrested for stalking, which includes a remedy authorized under RCW 7.92.160.

6. "Stalking protection order" means an ex parte temporary order or a final order granted under this chapter, which includes a remedy authorized in RCW 7.92.100.

\[ [2020 c 296 § 4](https://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/2019-20/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/Senate/5149-S2.SL.pdf?cite=2020%20c%20296%20§%204); [2013 c 84 § 2](https://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/2013-14/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/House/1383-S.SL.pdf?cite=2013%20c%2084%20§%202); \]

## 7.92.030 - Petition for stalking protection order—Creation—Contents. (Effective until July 1, 2022.)
There shall exist an action known as a petition for a stalking protection order.

1. A petition for relief shall allege the existence of stalking conduct and shall be accompanied by an affidavit made under oath stating the specific reasons that have caused the petitioner to become reasonably fearful that the respondent intends to injure the petitioner or another person, or the petitioner's property or the property of another. The petition shall disclose the existence of any other litigation or of any other restraining, protection, or no-contact orders between the parties.

2. A petition for relief shall be filed as a separate, stand-alone civil case and a petition for relief may be made regardless of whether or not there is a pending lawsuit, complaint, petition, or other action between the parties.

3. Forms and instructional brochures and the necessary number of certified copies shall be provided to the petitioner free of charge.

4. A person is not required to post a bond to obtain relief in any proceeding under this section.

5. If the petition states that disclosure of the petitioner's address would risk abuse of the petitioner or any member of the petitioner's family or household, that address may be omitted from all documents filed with the court. If the petitioner has not disclosed an address under this subsection, the petitioner shall designate an alternative address at which the respondent may serve notice of any motions.

\[ [2013 c 84 § 3](https://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/2013-14/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/House/1383-S.SL.pdf?cite=2013%20c%2084%20§%203); \]

## 7.92.040 - Petition—Who may file. (Effective until July 1, 2022.)
A petition for a stalking protection order may be filed by a person:

1. Who does not qualify for a protection order under chapter 26.50 RCW and who is a victim of stalking conduct; or

2. On behalf of any of the following persons who is a victim of stalking conduct and who does not qualify for a protection order under chapter 26.50 RCW:

   a. A minor child, where the petitioner is a parent, a legal custodian, or, where the respondent is not a parent, an adult with whom the child is currently residing; or

   b. A vulnerable adult as defined in RCW 74.34.020 and where the petitioner is an interested person as defined in *RCW 74.34.020(10).

\[ [2013 c 84 § 4](https://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/2013-14/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/House/1383-S.SL.pdf?cite=2013%20c%2084%20§%204); \]

## 7.92.050 - Petition—Additional requirements. (Effective until July 1, 2022.)
1. Any person may seek relief under this chapter by filing a petition with a court alleging that the person has been the victim of stalking conduct committed by the respondent.

2. A minor sixteen years of age or older may seek relief under this chapter and is not required to seek relief through a guardian or next friend. This does not preclude a parent or legal custodian of a victim sixteen or seventeen years of age from seeking relief on behalf of the minor.

3. The district courts shall have original jurisdiction and cognizance of any civil actions and proceedings brought under this chapter, except a district court shall transfer such actions and proceedings to the superior court when it is shown that (a) the petitioner, victim, or respondent to the petition is under eighteen years of age; (b) the action involves title or possession of real property; (c) a superior court has exercised or is exercising jurisdiction over a proceeding involving the parties; or (d) the action would have the effect of interfering with a respondent's care, control, or custody of the respondent's minor child.

4. Municipal courts may exercise jurisdiction and cognizance of any civil actions and proceedings brought under this chapter by adoption of local court rule, except a municipal court shall transfer such actions and proceedings to the superior court when it is shown that (a) the petitioner, victim, or respondent to the petition is under eighteen years of age; (b) the action involves title or possession of real property; (c) a superior court has exercised or is exercising jurisdiction over a proceeding involving the parties; or (d) the action would have the effect of interfering with a respondent's care, control, or custody of the respondent's minor child.

5. Superior courts shall have concurrent jurisdiction to receive transfer of stalking petitions in cases where a district or municipal court judge makes findings of fact and conclusions of law showing that meritorious reasons exist for the transfer. The jurisdiction of district and municipal courts is limited to enforcement of RCW 26.50.110(1), or the equivalent municipal ordinance, and the issuance and enforcement of temporary orders provided for in RCW 7.92.120 if the superior court is exercising jurisdiction over a proceeding under this chapter involving the parties.

6. No guardian or guardian ad litem need be appointed on behalf of a respondent to an action under this chapter if such respondent is sixteen years of age or older.

7. If a guardian ad litem is appointed for the petitioner or respondent, the petitioner shall not be required to pay any fee associated with such appointment.

8. An action under this chapter shall be filed in the county or the municipality where the petitioner resides, unless the petitioner has left the residence or household to avoid stalking conduct. In that case, the petitioner may bring an action in the county or municipality of the previous or the new residence or household.

\[ [2013 c 84 § 5](https://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/2013-14/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/House/1383-S.SL.pdf?cite=2013%20c%2084%20§%205); \]

## 7.92.060 - Petition—Hearings prior to issuance of protection order. (Effective until July 1, 2022.)
Upon receipt of the petition, the court shall order a hearing which shall be held not later than fourteen days from the date of the order. The court may schedule a hearing by telephone, to reasonably accommodate a disability, or in exceptional circumstances to protect a petitioner from further stalking behavior. The court shall require assurances of the petitioner's identity before conducting a telephonic hearing. Except as provided in RCW 7.92.150, personal service shall be made upon the respondent not less than five court days prior to the hearing. If timely personal service cannot be made, the court shall set a new hearing date and shall require additional attempts at obtaining personal service or other service as permitted under RCW 7.92.150. The court may issue an ex parte temporary stalking order pending the hearing as provided in RCW 7.92.120.

\[ [2013 c 84 § 6](https://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/2013-14/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/House/1383-S.SL.pdf?cite=2013%20c%2084%20§%206); \]

## 7.92.070 - Consultation with judicial information system. (Effective until July 1, 2022.)
Before granting an order under this chapter, the court may consult the judicial information system, if available, to determine criminal history or the pendency of other proceedings involving the parties.

\[ [2013 c 84 § 7](https://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/2013-14/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/House/1383-S.SL.pdf?cite=2013%20c%2084%20§%207); \]

## 7.92.080 - Fees not permitted. (Effective until July 1, 2022.)
No fees for filing or service of process may be charged by a public agency to petitioners seeking relief under this chapter.

\[ [2013 c 84 § 8](https://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/2013-14/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/House/1383-S.SL.pdf?cite=2013%20c%2084%20§%208); \]

## 7.92.090 - Victim's advocates. (Effective until July 1, 2022.)
Victim advocates shall be allowed to accompany the victim and confer with the victim, unless otherwise directed by the court. Court administrators shall allow advocates to assist victims of stalking conduct in the preparation of petitions for stalking protection orders. Advocates are not engaged in the unauthorized practice of law when providing assistance of the types specified in this section.

\[ [2013 c 84 § 9](https://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/2013-14/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/House/1383-S.SL.pdf?cite=2013%20c%2084%20§%209); \]

## 7.92.100 - Burden of proof—Issuance of protection order—Remedies. (Effective until July 1, 2022.)
1. [Empty]

   a. If the court finds by a preponderance of the evidence that the petitioner has been a victim of stalking conduct by the respondent, the court shall issue a stalking protection order.

   b. The petitioner shall not be denied a stalking protection order because the petitioner or the respondent is a minor or because the petitioner did not report the stalking conduct to law enforcement. The court, when determining whether or not to issue a stalking protection order, may not require proof of the respondent's intentions regarding the acts alleged by the petitioner. Modification and extension of prior stalking protection orders shall be in accordance with this chapter.

2. The court may provide relief as follows:

   a. Restrain the respondent from having any contact, including nonphysical contact, with the petitioner directly, indirectly, or through third parties regardless of whether those third parties know of the order;

   b. Exclude the respondent from the petitioner's residence, workplace, or school, or from the day care, workplace, or school of the petitioner's minor children;

   c. Prohibit the respondent from knowingly coming within, or knowingly remaining within, a specified distance from a specified location;

   d. Prohibit the respondent from keeping the petitioner and/or the petitioner's minor children under surveillance, to include electronic surveillance;

   e. Order any other injunctive relief as necessary or appropriate for the protection of the petitioner, to include a mental health and/or chemical dependency evaluation; and

   f. Require the respondent to pay the administrative court costs and service fees, as established by the county or municipality incurring the expense and to reimburse the petitioner for costs incurred in bringing the action, including reasonable attorneys' fees.

3. In issuing the order, the court shall consider the provisions of RCW 9.41.800, and shall order the respondent to surrender, and prohibit the respondent from possessing, all firearms, dangerous weapons, and any concealed pistol license as required in RCW 9.41.800.

4. Unless otherwise stated in the order, when a person is petitioning on behalf of a minor child or vulnerable adult, the relief authorized in this section shall apply only for the protection of the victim, and not the petitioner.

5. In cases where the petitioner and the respondent attend the same public or private elementary, middle, or high school, the court, when issuing a protection order and providing relief, shall consider, among the other facts of the case, the severity of the act, any continuing physical danger or emotional distress to the petitioner, and the expense difficulty, and educational disruption that would be caused by a transfer of the respondent to another school. The court may order that the person restrained in the order not attend the public or approved private elementary, middle, or high school attended by the person protected by the order. In the event the court orders a transfer of the restrained person to another school, the parents or legal guardians of the person restrained in the order are responsible for transportation and other costs associated with the change of school by the person restrained in the order. The court shall send notice of the restriction on attending the same school as the person protected by the order to the public or approved private school the person restrained by the order will attend and to the school the person protected by the order attends.

\[ [2019 c 245 § 7](https://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/2019-20/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/House/1786-S.SL.pdf?cite=2019%20c%20245%20§%207); [2013 c 84 § 10](https://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/2013-14/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/House/1383-S.SL.pdf?cite=2013%20c%2084%20§%2010); \]

## 7.92.110 - Accountability for conduct of others. (Effective until July 1, 2022.)
For the purposes of issuing a stalking protection order, deciding what relief should be included in the order, and enforcing the order, RCW 9A.08.020 shall govern whether the respondent is legally accountable for the conduct of another person.

\[ [2013 c 84 § 11](https://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/2013-14/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/House/1383-S.SL.pdf?cite=2013%20c%2084%20§%2011); \]

## 7.92.120 - Ex parte temporary order for protection—Issuance. (Effective until July 1, 2022.)
1. Where it appears from the petition and any additional evidence that the respondent has engaged in stalking conduct and that irreparable injury could result if an order is not issued immediately without prior notice, the court may grant an ex parte temporary order for protection, pending a full hearing and grant such injunctive relief as it deems proper, including the relief as specified under *RCW 7.92.100 (2)(a) through (d) and (4).

2. Irreparable injury under this section includes, but is not limited to, situations in which the respondent has recently threatened the petitioner with bodily injury or has engaged in acts of stalking conduct against the petitioner.

3. In issuing the order, the court shall consider the provisions of RCW 9.41.800, and shall order the respondent to surrender, and prohibit the respondent from possessing, all firearms, dangerous weapons, and any concealed pistol license as required in RCW 9.41.800.

4. The court shall hold an ex parte hearing in person or by telephone on the day the petition is filed or on the following judicial day.

5. An ex parte temporary stalking protection order shall be effective for a fixed period not to exceed fourteen days or twenty-four days if the court has permitted service by publication or mail. The ex parte order may be reissued. A full hearing, as provided in this chapter, shall be set for not later than fourteen days from the issuance of the temporary order or not later than twenty-four days if service by publication or by mail is permitted. Unless the court has permitted service by publication or mail, the respondent shall be personally served with a copy of the ex parte order along with a copy of the petition and notice of the date set for the hearing.

6. Any order issued under this section shall contain the date and time of issuance and the expiration date and shall be entered into a statewide judicial information system by the clerk of the court within one judicial day after issuance.

7. If the court declines to issue an ex parte temporary stalking protection order, the court shall state the particular reasons for the court's denial. The court's denial of a motion for an ex parte temporary order shall be filed with the court.

8. A knowing violation of a court order issued under this section is punishable under RCW 26.50.110.

\[ [2019 c 245 § 8](https://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/2019-20/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/House/1786-S.SL.pdf?cite=2019%20c%20245%20§%208); [2013 c 84 § 12](https://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/2013-14/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/House/1383-S.SL.pdf?cite=2013%20c%2084%20§%2012); \]

## 7.92.125 - Ex parte temporary order—Admissibility in subsequent civil actions. (Effective until July 1, 2022.)
An ex parte temporary order issued under this chapter shall not be admissible as evidence in any subsequent civil action for damages arising from the conduct alleged in the petition or the order.

\[ [2013 c 84 § 22](https://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/2013-14/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/House/1383-S.SL.pdf?cite=2013%20c%2084%20§%2022); \]

## 7.92.130 - Protection orders—Duration. (Effective until July 1, 2022.)
1. Except as otherwise provided in this section or RCW 7.92.160, a final stalking protection order shall be effective for a fixed period of time or be permanent.

2. Any ex parte temporary or final stalking protection order may be renewed one or more times. The petitioner may apply for renewal of the order by filing a petition for renewal at any time within the three months before the order expires. If the motion for renewal is uncontested and the petitioner seeks no modification of the order, the order may be renewed on the basis of the petitioner's motion or affidavit stating that there has been no material change in relevant circumstances since entry of the order and stating the reason for the requested renewal. The court shall grant the petition for renewal unless the respondent proves by a preponderance of the evidence that the respondent will not resume acts of stalking conduct against the petitioner or the petitioner's children or family or household members when the order expires. The court may renew the stalking protection order for another fixed time period or may enter a permanent order as provided in this section. The court may award court costs, service fees, and reasonable attorneys' fees as provided in RCW 7.92.100.

3. Any stalking protection order which would expire on a court holiday shall instead expire at the close of the next court business day.

4. The practice of dismissing or suspending a criminal prosecution in exchange for the issuance of a stalking protection order undermines the purposes of this chapter. This section shall not be construed as encouraging that practice.

5. If the court declines to issue an order for protection or declines to renew an order for protection, the court shall state in writing on the order the particular reasons for the court's denial.

\[ [2013 c 84 § 13](https://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/2013-14/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/House/1383-S.SL.pdf?cite=2013%20c%2084%20§%2013); \]

## 7.92.140 - Protection order—Contents. (Effective until July 1, 2022.)
1. Any stalking protection order shall describe each remedy granted by the court, in reasonable detail and not by reference to any other document, so that the respondent may clearly understand what he or she must do or refrain from doing.

2. A stalking protection order shall further state the following:

   a. The name of the petitioner that the court finds was the victim of stalking by the respondent;

   b. The date and time the stalking protection order was issued, whether it is an ex parte temporary or final order, and the duration of the order;

   c. The date, time, and place for any scheduled hearing for renewal of that stalking protection order or for another order of greater duration or scope;

   d. For each remedy in an ex parte temporary stalking protection order, the reason for entering that remedy without prior notice to the respondent or greater notice than was actually given;

   e. For ex parte temporary stalking protection orders, that the respondent may petition the court, to modify or terminate the order if he or she did not receive actual prior notice of the hearing and if the respondent alleges that he or she had a meritorious defense to the order or that the order or its remedy is not authorized by this chapter.

3. A stalking protection order shall include the following notice, printed in conspicuous type: "A knowing violation of this stalking protection order is a criminal offense under chapter 26.50 RCW and will subject a violator to arrest. You can be arrested even if any person protected by the order invites or allows you to violate the order's prohibitions. You have the sole responsibility to avoid or refrain from violating the order's provisions. Only the court can change the order."

\[ [2013 c 84 § 14](https://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/2013-14/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/House/1383-S.SL.pdf?cite=2013%20c%2084%20§%2014); \]

## 7.92.150 - Protection orders—Service to respondent—Service by publication. (Effective until July 1, 2022.)
1. An order issued under this chapter shall be personally served upon the respondent, except as provided in subsection (6), (7), or (8) of this section. If the respondent is a minor, the respondent's parent or legal custodian shall also be personally served.

2. The sheriff of the county or the peace officers of the municipality in which the respondent resides shall serve the respondent personally unless the petitioner elects to have the respondent served by a private party. If the order includes a requirement under RCW 9.41.800 for the immediate surrender of all firearms, dangerous weapons, and any concealed pistol license, the order must be served by a law enforcement officer.

3. If service by a sheriff or municipal peace officer is to be used, the clerk of the court shall have a copy of any order issued under this chapter electronically forwarded on or before the next judicial day to the appropriate law enforcement agency specified in the order for service upon the respondent. Service of an order issued under this chapter shall take precedence over the service of other documents unless they are of a similar emergency nature.

4. If the sheriff or municipal peace officer cannot complete service upon the respondent within ten days, the sheriff or municipal peace officer shall notify the petitioner. The petitioner shall provide information sufficient to permit notification.

5. Returns of service under this chapter shall be made in accordance with the applicable court rules.

6. If an order entered by the court recites that the respondent appeared in person before the court, the necessity for further service is waived and proof of service of that order is not necessary.

7. If the respondent was not personally served with the petition, notice of hearing, and ex parte order before the hearing, the court shall reset the hearing for twenty-four days from the date of entry of the order and may order service by publication instead of personal service under the following circumstances:

   a. The sheriff or municipal officer or private process server files an affidavit stating that the officer or private process server was unable to complete personal service upon the respondent. The affidavit must describe the number and types of attempts the officer or private process server made to complete service;

   b. The petitioner files an affidavit stating that the petitioner believes that the respondent is hiding from the server to avoid service. The petitioner's affidavit must state the reasons for the belief that the respondent is avoiding service;

   c. The server has deposited a copy of the petition, notice of hearing, and the ex parte order of protection in the post office, directed to the respondent at the respondent's last known address, unless the server states that the server does not know the respondent's address;

   d. The court finds reasonable grounds exist to believe that the respondent is concealing himself or herself to avoid service, and that further attempts to personally serve the respondent would be futile or unduly burdensome;

   e. The court shall reissue the temporary order of protection not to exceed another twenty-four days from the date of reissuing the ex parte protection order and order to provide service by publication; and

   f. The publication shall be made in a newspaper of general circulation in the county where the petition was brought and in the county of the last known address of the respondent once a week for three consecutive weeks. The newspaper selected must be one of the three most widely circulated papers in the county. The publication of summons shall not be made until the court orders service by publication under this section. Service of the summons shall be considered complete when the publication has been made for three consecutive weeks. The summons must be signed by the petitioner. The summons shall contain the date of the first publication, and shall require the respondent upon whom service by publication is desired, to appear and answer the petition on the date set for the hearing. The summons shall also contain a brief statement of the reason for the petition and a summary of the provisions under the ex parte order. The summons shall be essentially in the following form:

In the  . . . . . . . . . court of the state of Washington for the county of  . . . . . . . . . . .. . . .,Petitionervs.No.  . . . . . .. . . .,RespondentThe state of Washington to  . . . . . . . . . . . (respondent):You are hereby summoned to appear on the  . . . . day of  . . . . . ., 20 . . ., at  . . . . a.m./p.m., and respond to the petition. If you fail to respond, an order of protection will be issued against you pursuant to the provisions of the stalking protection order act, chapter 7.92 RCW, for a minimum of one year from the date you are required to appear. A temporary order of protection has been issued against you, restraining you from the following: (Insert a brief statement of the provisions of the ex parte order.) A copy of the petition, notice of hearing, and ex parte order has been filed with the clerk of this court. . . . . Petitioner . . . .

In the  . . . . . . . . . court of the state of Washington for the county of  . . . . . . . . . . .

. . . .,

Petitioner

vs.

No.  . . . . . .

. . . .,

Respondent

The state of Washington to  . . . . . . . . . . . (respondent):

You are hereby summoned to appear on the  . . . . day of  . . . . . ., 20 . . ., at  . . . . a.m./p.m., and respond to the petition. If you fail to respond, an order of protection will be issued against you pursuant to the provisions of the stalking protection order act, chapter 7.92 RCW, for a minimum of one year from the date you are required to appear. A temporary order of protection has been issued against you, restraining you from the following: (Insert a brief statement of the provisions of the ex parte order.) A copy of the petition, notice of hearing, and ex parte order has been filed with the clerk of this court.

 

. . . .

 

Petitioner . . . .

8. In circumstances justifying service by publication under subsection (7) of this section, if the serving party files an affidavit stating facts from which the court determines that service by mail is just as likely to give actual notice as service by publication and that the serving party is unable to afford the cost of service by publication, the court may order that service be made by mail. Such service shall be made by any person over eighteen years of age, who is competent to be a witness, other than a party, by mailing copies of the order and other process to the party to be served at his or her last known address or any other address determined by the court to be appropriate. Two copies shall be mailed, postage prepaid, one by ordinary first-class mail and the other by a form of mail requiring a signed receipt showing when and to whom it was delivered. The envelopes must bear the return address of the sender.

   a. Proof of service under this section shall be consistent with court rules for civil proceedings.

   b. Service under this section may be used in the same manner and shall have the same jurisdictional effect as service by publication for purposes of this chapter. Service shall be deemed complete upon the mailing of two copies as prescribed in this section.

\[ [2019 c 245 § 9](https://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/2019-20/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/House/1786-S.SL.pdf?cite=2019%20c%20245%20§%209); [2013 c 84 § 15](https://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/2013-14/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/House/1383-S.SL.pdf?cite=2013%20c%2084%20§%2015); \]

## 7.92.160 - Court-initiated stalking no-contact orders. (Effective until July 1, 2022. Recodified as RCW  9A.46.055.)
1. [Empty]

   a. When any person charged with or arrested for stalking as defined in RCW 9A.46.110 or any other stalking-related offense under RCW 9A.46.060 is released from custody before arraignment or trial on bail or personal recognizance, the court authorizing the release may prohibit that person from having any contact with the victim. The jurisdiction authorizing the release shall determine whether that person should be prohibited from having any contact with the victim. If there is no outstanding restraining or protective order prohibiting that person from having contact with the victim, and the victim does not qualify for a domestic violence protection order under chapter 26.50 RCW, the court authorizing release may issue, by telephone, a stalking no-contact order prohibiting the person charged or arrested from having contact with the victim or from knowingly coming within, or knowingly remaining within, a specified distance of a location.

   b. In issuing the order, the court shall consider the provisions of RCW 9.41.800.

   c. The stalking no-contact order shall also be issued in writing as soon as possible.

2. [Empty]

   a. At the time of arraignment or whenever a motion is brought to modify the conditions of the defendant's release, the court shall determine whether a stalking no-contact order shall be issued or extended. If a stalking no-contact order is issued or extended, the court may also include in the conditions of release a requirement that the defendant submit to electronic monitoring, including real-time global position satellite [global positioning system] monitoring with victim notification. If electronic monitoring is ordered, the court shall specify who shall provide the monitoring services, and the terms under which the monitoring shall be performed. Upon conviction, the court may require as a condition of the sentence that the defendant reimburse the providing agency for the costs of the electronic monitoring, including costs relating to real-time global position satellite [global positioning system] monitoring with victim notification.

   b. A stalking no-contact order issued by the court in conjunction with criminal charges shall terminate if the defendant is acquitted or the charges are dismissed, unless the victim files an independent action for a stalking protection order. If the victim files an independent action for a civil stalking protection order, the order may be continued by the court until a full hearing is conducted pursuant to RCW 7.92.060.

3. [Empty]

   a. The written order releasing the person charged or arrested shall contain the court's directives and shall bear the legend: "Violation of this order is a criminal offense under chapter 26.50 RCW and will subject a violator to arrest. You can be arrested even if any person protected by the order invites or allows you to violate the order's prohibitions. You have the sole responsibility to avoid or refrain from violating the order's provisions. Only the court can change the order."

   b. A certified copy of the order shall be provided to the victim at no charge.

4. If a stalking no-contact order has been issued prior to charging, that order shall expire at arraignment or within seventy-two hours if charges are not filed.

5. Whenever an order prohibiting contact is issued pursuant to subsection (2) of this section, the clerk of the court shall forward a copy of the order on or before the next judicial day to the appropriate law enforcement agency specified in the order. Upon receipt of the copy of the order, the law enforcement agency shall enter the order for one year unless a different expiration date is specified on the order into any computer-based criminal intelligence information system available in this state used by law enforcement agencies to list outstanding warrants. Entry into the computer-based criminal intelligence information system constitutes notice to all law enforcement agencies of the existence of the order. The order is fully enforceable in any jurisdiction in the state.

6. [Empty]

   a. When a defendant is found guilty of stalking as defined in RCW 9A.46.110 or any other stalking-related offense under RCW 9A.46.060 and a condition of the sentence restricts the defendant's ability to have contact with the victim, and the victim does not qualify for a domestic violence protection order under chapter 26.50 RCW, the condition shall be recorded as a stalking no-contact order.

   b. The written order entered as a condition of sentencing shall contain the court's directives and shall bear the legend: "Violation of this order is a criminal offense under chapter 26.50 RCW and will subject a violator to arrest. You can be arrested even if any person protected by the order invites or allows you to violate the order's prohibitions. You have the sole responsibility to avoid or refrain from violating the order's provisions. Only the court can change the order."

   c. A final stalking no-contact order entered in conjunction with a criminal prosecution shall remain in effect for a period of five years from the date of entry.

   d. A certified copy of the order shall be provided to the victim at no charge.

7. A knowing violation of a court order issued under subsection (1), (2), or (6) of this section is punishable under RCW 26.50.110.

8. Whenever a stalking no-contact order is issued, modified, or terminated under subsection (1), (2), or (6) of this section, the clerk of the court shall forward a copy of the order on or before the next judicial day to the appropriate law enforcement agency specified in the order. Upon receipt of the copy of the order, the law enforcement agency shall enter the order for one year unless a different expiration date is specified on the order into any computer-based criminal intelligence information system available in this state used by law enforcement agencies to list outstanding warrants. Entry into the computer-based criminal intelligence information system constitutes notice to all law enforcement agencies of the existence of the order. The order is fully enforceable in any jurisdiction in the state. Upon receipt of notice that an order has been terminated under subsection (2) of this section, the law enforcement agency shall remove the order from the computer-based criminal intelligence information system.

\[ [2013 c 84 § 16](https://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/2013-14/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/House/1383-S.SL.pdf?cite=2013%20c%2084%20§%2016); \]

## 7.92.170 - Personal jurisdiction by court over nonresident individuals. (Effective until July 1, 2022.)
1. In a proceeding in which a petition for a stalking protection order is sought under this chapter, a court of this state may exercise personal jurisdiction over a nonresident individual if:

   a. The individual is personally served with a petition within this state;

   b. The individual submits to the jurisdiction of this state by consent, entering a general appearance, or filing a responsive document having the effect of waiving any objection to consent to personal jurisdiction;

   c. The act or acts of the individual or the individual's agent giving rise to the petition or enforcement of a stalking protection order occurred within this state;

   d. [Empty]

      i. The act or acts of the individual or the individual's agent giving rise to the petition or enforcement of a stalking protection order occurred outside this state and are part of an ongoing pattern of stalking behavior that has an adverse effect on the petitioner or a member of the petitioner's family or household and the petitioner resides in this state; or

      ii. As a result of acts of stalking behavior, the petitioner or a member of the petitioner's family or household has sought safety or protection in this state and currently resides in this state; or

   e. There is any other basis consistent with RCW 4.28.185 or with the Constitution of this state and the Constitution of the United States.

2. For jurisdiction to be exercised under subsection (1)(d)(i) or (ii) of this section, the individual must have communicated with the petitioner or a member of the petitioner's family, directly or indirectly, or made known a threat to the safety of the petitioner or member of the petitioner's family while the petitioner or family member resides in this state. For the purposes of subsection (1)(d)(i) or (ii) of this section, "communicated or made known" includes, but is not limited to, through the mail, telephonically, or a posting on an electronic communication site or medium. Communication on any electronic medium that is generally available to any individual residing in the state shall be sufficient to exercise jurisdiction under subsection (1)(d)(i) or (ii) of this section.

3. For the purposes of this section, an act or acts that "occurred within this state" includes, but is not limited to, an oral or written statement made or published by a person outside of this state to any person in this state by means of the mail, interstate commerce, or foreign commerce. Oral or written statements sent by electronic mail or the internet are deemed to have "occurred within this state."

\[ [2013 c 84 § 17](https://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/2013-14/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/House/1383-S.SL.pdf?cite=2013%20c%2084%20§%2017); \]

## 7.92.180 - Copy of order to be forwarded to law enforcement agency—Entry of information into computer-based information systems. (Effective until July 1, 2022.)
1. A copy of a stalking protection order or stalking no-contact order granted under this chapter shall be forwarded by the clerk of the court on or before the next judicial day to the appropriate law enforcement agency specified in the order. Upon receipt of the order, the law enforcement agency shall immediately enter the order into any computer-based criminal intelligence information system available in this state used by law enforcement agencies to list outstanding warrants. The order shall remain in the computer for one year unless a different expiration date is specified on the order. Upon receipt of notice that an order has been terminated, the law enforcement agency shall remove the order from the computer-based criminal intelligence information system. The law enforcement agency shall only expunge from the computer-based criminal intelligence information system orders that are expired, vacated, terminated, or superseded. Entry into the law enforcement information system constitutes notice to all law enforcement agencies of the existence of the order. The order is fully enforceable in any county in the state.

2. The information entered into the computer-based criminal intelligence information system shall include notice to law enforcement whether the order was personally served, served by publication, or served by mail.

\[ [2013 c 84 § 18](https://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/2013-14/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/House/1383-S.SL.pdf?cite=2013%20c%2084%20§%2018); \]

## 7.92.190 - Modification or termination of protection orders. (Effective until July 1, 2022.)
1. Upon application with notice to all parties and after a hearing, the court may modify the terms of an existing stalking protection order.

2. A respondent's motion to modify or terminate an existing stalking protection order must include a declaration setting forth facts supporting the requested order for termination or modification. The nonmoving parties to the proceeding may file opposing declarations. The court shall deny the motion unless it finds that adequate cause for hearing the motion is established by the declarations. If the court finds that the respondent established adequate cause, the court shall set a date for hearing the respondent's motion.

3. The court may not terminate or modify an existing stalking protection order unless the respondent proves by a preponderance of the evidence that there has been a substantial change in circumstances such that the respondent will not resume acts of stalking conduct against the petitioner or those persons protected by the protection order if the order is terminated or modified. The petitioner bears no burden of proving that he or she has a current reasonable fear of harm by the respondent.

4. A respondent may file a motion to terminate or modify an order no more than once in every twelve-month period that the order is in effect, starting from the date of the order and continuing through any renewal.

5. A court may require the respondent to pay the petitioner for costs incurred in responding to a motion to terminate or modify a stalking protection order, including reasonable attorneys' fees.

6. In any situation where an order is terminated or modified before its expiration date, the clerk of the court shall forward on or before the next judicial day a true copy of the modified order or the termination order to the appropriate law enforcement agency specified in the modified or termination order. Upon receipt of the order, the law enforcement agency shall promptly enter it in the computer-based criminal intelligence information system, or if the order is terminated, remove the order from the computer-based criminal intelligence information system.

\[ [2019 c 245 § 10](https://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/2019-20/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/House/1786-S.SL.pdf?cite=2019%20c%20245%20§%2010); [2013 c 84 § 19](https://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/2013-14/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/House/1383-S.SL.pdf?cite=2013%20c%2084%20§%2019); \]

## 7.92.900 - Construction—Filing of criminal charges not required. (Effective until July 1, 2022.)
Nothing in this chapter shall be construed as requiring criminal charges to be filed as a condition of a stalking protection order being issued.

\[ [2013 c 84 § 23](https://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/2013-14/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/House/1383-S.SL.pdf?cite=2013%20c%2084%20§%2023); \]

## 7.92.901 - Short title. (Effective until July 1, 2022.)
Chapter 84, Laws of 2013 may be known and cited as the Jennifer Paulson stalking protection order act.

\[ [2013 c 84 § 24](https://lawfilesext.leg.wa.gov/biennium/2013-14/Pdf/Bills/Session%20Laws/House/1383-S.SL.pdf?cite=2013%20c%2084%20§%2024); \]

